TITRE: On Urging the Disciples to ‘Conceal the Secrets’ (Katm al-Asrar) and Cease from the Love of Appearance (Hubb az-Zuhur)

In the Name of Allah, The Most Gracious, The Most Merciful

All praise and thanks belong to Allah, The Lord of all the worlds, The Most Gracious, The Most Merciful.
May the peace and blessings of Allah be upon our master Muhammad, according to his true reality--and his
magnitude is extremely great.

As-Salaamu Alaykum wa Rahmatullahi Ta’ala wa Barakatuh! I have received your letter which you sent and I
am very happy about its content. I am entrusting your care to Allah, Whose safekeeping is eternal, and I am
advising you to attach your heart to Allah in all of your movements and moments of rest. Be for Allah!
“Whosoever is for Allah, Allah is for him!” Cast aside the entirety of creation in your service to the
Real--and your own ego (nafs) is also from among the created beings! “Say: ‘Allah!’ Then leave them to play
in their vain discussions and disputes.” (6:91).

You should know that (in this Qur’anic verse) Allah has described everything other than Him as “sport and
play” (Khawdan wa La’ban). You should therefore take for yourselves two (2) Shaykhs: your ‘Shaykh’ in the
Zahir should be the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger(SAWS) and your ’Shaykh’ in the Batin
is our master Ahmad al-Tijani(RA)--and he is always with you! But the means are only the means, no more!
What I just said was meant for you (the person the letter is addressed to). I am advising you to conceal
your secret and bury what Allah has entrusted to you from the ‘Mysteries of His Lordship’ (Sirr Rabubiyya)
until Allah causes you to appear. Whosoever lays claims to ‘Shaykh-hood’ before the appearance of
permission from Allah has destroyed and lost his Deen & his Dunya and he will be exposed and degraded
among his community! But if Allah causes you to appear, there is no one who can prevent His Gift!
The love of appearance (Hubb az-Zuhur) before its proper time will cut you off from appearing at all
because of the share you have allowed the ego (Haz an-Nafs). If Allah has kept you hidden, then being
hidden is what is best for you and if He makes you to appear, then appearance is what is best for you! Do
not want or desire except that which Allah wants and desires! Whosoever desires to be known then he is
really the servant of appearance, and whosoever desires to remain hidden is really the servant of
concealment, but whosoever only desires what is the desire of Allah is the real servant of Allah! The Gnostic
(al-‘Arif) is the one who has abandoned his will for the will of Allah!

Say to “Hadi” that I have given him permission to teach you the ‘Secret of Visitation’ (Sirr az-Ziyara)--and it
is 1/3rd of the Mysteries and it includes the Name which is specific to the spiritual station of Shaykh
Ahmad al-Tijani(RA). My greeting of peace should be given to the Khalifa Habibullah Seck. I am requesting
that he pray for us. Salaam.

Ibrahim ibn Al-Hajj Abdullahi al-Tijani
1348 AH / 1929 CE

TITRE: On Observing the Religious Obligations

In the Name of Allah ‫ﷻ‬, The Most Gracious, The Most Merciful:

May the peace and blessings of Allah ‫ ﷻ‬be upon our master Muḥammad ‫ ﷺ‬and also upon his Family
and Companions. All praise and thanks is due to Allah ‫ﷻ‬, Who has made following His Awliyāʾ (a
condition) of success and righteousness! He who has made loving them, venerating them and obeying their
commands (a condition) for what is profitable and beneficial! Peace and blessings be upon the Master ‫ﷺ‬
of this life and the next, the one who said, “Islām has been built upon five pillars: to bear witness there is no
god except Allah ‫ ﷻ‬and Muḥammad ‫ ﷺ‬is His Messenger; to establish the five daily prayers [ṣalāt]; to fast
(the month of Ramaḍān); to pay the alms-due [zakāt]; and to perform the pilgrimage to Makkah if one is
financially able.”

May Allah ‫ ﷻ‬be pleased with his ‫ ﷺ‬Absolute Inheritor (Shaykh Aḥmad al-Tijānī), who said, “If you hear
anything attributed to me, weigh it in the scale of the Sacred Law [sharīʿa]; if it conforms to the Sharīʿa, then
accept it; and if it does not, then reject it!” After this: I am advising myself and all of you with what Allah ‫ﷻ‬
has advised the previous communities—to have conscious awareness of Allah ‫[ ﷻ‬taqwa] in public and in
private! The (basic meaning of) taqwa is to obey the commands and avoid the prohibitions of Allah ‫ﷻ‬.
The most important of His commands is the observance of the five daily prayers in congregation and on
time—along with the purification by water! The most amazing thing is for a person to claim a relationship
to Allah ‫ ﷻ‬and to our Shaykh Aḥmad al-Tijānī, may Allah ‫ ﷻ‬be well-pleased with him, and then to be
neglectful about his prayer or to be heedless about its (pre-requisite) purification—such as performing
purification by means of clean soil [tayammum] for prayer, falsely claiming an excuse. The (valid) excuse
for tayammum does not last (past one obligatory prayer) and it cannot become generalized behavior for an
entire community! Verily, we are from Allah ‫ ﷻ‬and to Him is our return! “So repent to your Creator and
kill yourselves [nafs], that is better for you with your Creator,” (Qurʾān 2:54).

After this: I am writing this letter to all of my beloved—each one by his name—the common and the
elite, and everyone else in general. As-salāmu ʿalaykum wa raḥmatuʾllāhi taʿālā wa barakātuhu! A greeting
which is carried by the support of our Master Aḥmad al-Tijānī, may Allah ‫ ﷻ‬be well-pleased with him. I
am asking Allah ‫ ﷻ‬to refine and rectify our spiritual states and our destinies, and to grant us the sweetness
of faith, and to bestow upon us the sincerity of our worshipful service [ṣidq al-ʿubūdiyya], along with
maintaining the rights of Lordship [ḥuqūq al-Rabūbiyya]. I am asking Him ‫ ﷻ‬to inscribe our names in the
Register of His Beloved and Chosen Ones [dīwān aḥbāb wa aṣfiyāʾ] and to protect and watch over us, surely
He is the Guardian of the righteous!

I am advising all of you to congregate with the brethren for the recitation of the daily waẓīfa, for whosoever
among you abandons it for even one time without a valid Law-based excuse after receiving our letter should
know that I am free of him, and he has nothing to do with us and we have nothing to do with him! Verily,
no one can rightfully be said to travel in our Ṭarīqa except by acting as I and my companions are doing. You
must constantly renew your repentance all of the time—at every spiritual station—along with diligent
observance of Allah ‫[ ﷻ‬murāqaba], with the passage of every breath and every moment! You must act on
the saying of the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬, “Hold yourselves to account before you are brought to account!” You must
strive with all sincerity in your dealings with your Lord and Master, so that none of you are found where He
‫ ﷻ‬has prohibited, nor negligent with what He ‫ ﷻ‬has commanded.

I am warning all of you to avoid approaching any of the forbidden things, as the ḥarām things are the
neighbors of the Hellfire! I am also warning you about heedlessness [ghafla], because heedlessness is the
origin of every sin, lust, and ugly behavior. The Real ‫ ﷻ‬has said, “Good behavior [adab] is expected of
whosoever I have unveiled My Names to, and total annihilation is due from the person I have unveiled the
perfection of My Essence to!” Therefore, I advise all of you to have good adab in your spiritual wayfaring
[sulūk]!

As the poet said: “A spiritually-enraptured mystic [majdhūb] has become rebellious if he has failed to sober
up, and if he does not correct himself with obedience he has abandoned guidance. He who obtains what is
desired must rush to gratitude; if not, then the severance of his spirit (from the Divine Presence) is only the
beginning of his ruin!”

Therefore, I am advising all of you to occupy yourselves (totally) with Allah ‫ ﷻ‬by rejecting everything other
than Allah ‫ !ﷻ‬I am advising all of you to hold to patience; to love one another; to guide one another; to
visit one another; to show humility to one another; and to sit with one another—in Allah ‫ﷻ‬, for Allah ‫ﷻ‬,
and by Allah ‫ !ﷻ‬Assist one another in righteousness [birr] and taqwa, and remember Allah ‫ ﷻ‬with much
remembrance, in order that you may be successful! Save your family and yourselves from the Hellfire, and
the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬said, “That is to say to your family: ‘Guard your prayer!’, ‘Guard your prayer!’ ‘Guard your
fasting!’, ‘Guard your fasting!’ ‘O family, Purify yourselves! ‘O family, provide for the poor!’” Allah ‫ ﷻ‬says,
“Order your family to establish the prayer, and to be patient in its performance. We do not ask from you
provision, rather it is We Who provide for you and the good end belongs to those who are consciously aware of
Allah,” (20:132).

You should know that all of you must praise and thank Allah ‫ ﷻ‬because He has made you to be among the
first people to enter this Divine Effulgence [fayḍa]; but do not sit and relax or become comfortable, because
there are people coming after you who will outstrip you if you become negligent in performing the rights of
your Lord! Seek refuge in Allah ‫ ﷻ‬from that occurring because it will be the greatest loss! The goal of this
(Fayḍa Tijāniyya) is the constant spiritual elevation and increase with the passing of every moment! I advise

you to keep your Zāwiya active with the establishment of the five daily prayers and the recital of the
daily waẓīfa. I advise you to spend all of your (free) time in sending prayers and salutations upon the
Messenger of Allah ‫ ﷺ‬with Ṣalāt al-Fātiḥ (limā ughliq), for whosoever does this has obtained the
greatest success! Salām.

Transcribed by Sīdī ʿAlī ibn al-Ḥasan Cissé from the dictation of Shaykh Ibrāhīm Niāsse (al-Tijānī)

1930 CE | 1349‫ھ‬

- Muḥammad Abdullahi al-Tijānī al-Ibrāhīmī [©2010 Atlanta, GA] (ARB-ENG)

TITRE: The Message of Disavowal

In the name of Allah, the Most Widely Merciful, the Most Deeply Merciful, the Avenger (al-Muntaqim), the
Mighty (al-ʿAzīz), the Compeller (al-Jabbār), the Supreme (al-Mutakabbir). May the two modes of Peace be
upon the Messenger, the Master, the Slave, who said, “O Fatimah, daughter of Muhammad, I have nothing
that can avail you against Allah.”
After this preamble, I praise Him in a way befitting of His status, and may my greetings reach our son
Ahmad Thiam, Malik Sow, and everyone who sits with this message while claiming an affiliation with us.
Let it be known that: there are two kinds of people who have nothing to do with me nor with this path, if
they persist in their condition and do not travel further: a spiritually enraptured person (majdhūb) who does
not continue to travel the path to Allah by conforming to the Sacred Law, and a traveler on the path to Allah
(sālik) who is not spiritually enraptured. It is my concern, as you know, that everyone who desires to be with
me in my spiritual state should travel my path, doing as I do in both word and deed: by obeying Allah’s
commands and avoiding His prohibitions—both inwardly and outwardly—and thirsting and longing to
attain the pleasure of Allah and His Messenger. As for the person who is affiliated with us yet acts contrary
to the pure and noble Sacred Law, by engaging in what Allah has forbidden and abandoning His commands,
I call Allah as my witness, as I call you, that I have disavowed them. O Allah! I have disavowed what these
people have done. “So let those who oppose the Messenger’s command beware lest some trial befall them or
a grievous penalty be inflicted on them” (Qur’an 24:63). “And repent to Allah all together, O
believers” (Qur’an 24:31).
As for what you mentioned concerning my disciples being receptacles full with the secrets and mysteries of
the three divine presences, that is true—but where are my disciples to be found among you? If the situation
is as you have described, then they are rarer than the philosopher’s stone among you, and I am on the verge
of revoking my authorization from every muqaddam who does not do what they are supposed to when
prohibited things are done in their presence. If they are too weak to stop the bad actions, then let them
migrate to Allah and His Messenger and to us. By Allah, the only thing that has stopped them from
completely regressing to taking comfort in created beings is the length of time they have been connected to
us. Those who are present with us for great amounts of time soon forget all about vain desires. Indeed,
there are young people here who have forgotten their taste for vain desires, such that among them are those
who have even forgotten about their wives and would not think of lying with them without our permission
and our compelling them to do so. Such is the state of my students, and not otherwise.
So you must return to Allah by repentance, obedience to His commands, avoidance of His prohibitions,
asceticism, scrupulousness, and learning. Allah Almighty said to the Saint of Saints, “Say, ‘My Lord, increase
me in knowledge’” (Qur’an 20:114). So what befits the true murid is for them to keep journeying until they
catch up to me and, finding that I cannot help them, go to another shaykh with a higher maqam than me.
But you should know—may Allah have mercy on you—that many of those who claim to be shaykhs have
blocked people from the path of Allah because of their lack of uprightness. Whoever claims a connection to
Allah while blocking people from His path has indeed declared war with Allah and must be counted among
the wretched people who deny legitimate saints and ultimately deny Allah, because they ultimately become a
means for denial.

It is imperative that you spend a considerable amount of time in our presence so that you can receive from
us the correct etiquettes of traveling the path of Allah, just as you have taken from us the realities of spiritual
rapture—and whoever accomplishes that has indeed attained an immense success. It is also imperative that
you change whatever detestable conflict occurs between brothers or sisters in this path, whether by your
hand, your tongue, or your heart, as is mentioned in the hadith. And whoever desires to truly benefit must
memorize and preserve whatever advice—in poetry and prose—comes from us. As for this letter,
memorizing it is obligatory upon every murid, so everyone who comes across it must copy it and persist in
reading it every day.
Establish the salah, pay the zakat, fast the month of Ramadan, and perform the pilgrimage to Makkah if you
are able. Give charity from your wealth for Allah’s sake; for, in the hadith collection of Imam Muslim, it is
narrated that Allah’s Messenger (s.a.w.s.) said, “Purity is half of faith, ‘Al-Hamdu Lillah’ fills the scale,
‘Subhan Allah’ and ‘Al-Hamdu Lillah’ fill up—or fills up—what is between heaven and earth, prayer is a
light, patience is a brightness, and the Qur’an is either a proof for you or against you. Every person wakes up
each day as the purchaser of their own soul, either liberating it or sending it to destruction.” Allah has
said—and He is the most truthful of speakers—“Surely, Allah commands justice, excellence, and giving to
kin, and He forbids indecency, wrong, and oppression” (Qur’an 16:90). So woe upon woe to those who do
not accept the rulings of Allah and His Messenger (s.a.w.s.) with total and complete acceptance. But for the
one who receives our letter and then repents and rectifies what they can, to them belongs felicity in both
worlds—“Allah has pardoned what has passed.” As for the one who does not take heed, I call Allah as my
witness, and may you all witness, that I have disavowed them—and I only disavow them after the disavowal
of Allah and His Messenger (s.a.w.s.).
You must make much Salatul-Fatihi, and you must conceal divine secrets in word and deed. Leave off
speaking publicly in the speech of the People of Divine Realities. And travel on the straight path. All those
vain desires are idols that you worship after claiming faith; Allah Almighty says, “Whoever disbelieves in
idols and believes in Allah has grasped the most trustworthy handhold that will never break, and Allah is the
All-Hearing, the All-Knowing” (Qur’an 2:256).
As for you, Ahmad Thiam, disseminate this letter to everyone who is affiliated with us: send a copy of it to
every leader in every locale so that they can read it to whoever is with them and around them. I hope in
Allah that this letter will be greeted by pure hearts and attentive ears from all of you. May Allah guide us and
you.
Salaam,
Ibrahim ibn Al-Hajj Abdullahi al-Tijani, from the city of Kaolack (may Allah protect it from every affliction,
amin!)
1349 AH / 1930 CE

(Interpreted from the Arabic by Muhammad Abdullahi al-Tijani al-Ibrahimi and Adnan Wood-Smith)

TITRE: On That the Faydah will Reach the Horizons, by Allah’s (t.) Power

In the Name of God, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. All Praise is due to God, Lord of the Worlds.
The Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. The Owner of the Day of Judgment.

As for what follows:

May a complete and overarching peace come from the writing of the slave, who is sufficed with his Master
and Patron from all that is other than Him, Ibrāhīm ibn al-Ḥāj ‘Abdullāh al-Tijānī to my beloved, and my
father's true, al-Ḥasan Jāyn.

You must know that I am advising you for God and by God. You must know that yourself and others,
whoever they are, are a slave of God and a disciple of Shaikh al-Tijānī. God, be He exalted, has established
from His preceding decision, that the effulgence of this overflow in the Tijānī Tarīqa will occur on the
hands of its owner, may God be pleased with him. This owner is the Possessor of the Flood: he places it
wherever he wants through the discretion of the Venerable, the Almighty. Through God’s Power and Ability,
the Flood will be universal. No one will be able to seize it, nor stop it, nor will anything be able to obstruct
it. It will gush forth undoubtedly and with ease wherever the Tijanis are found.

Some of the shuyūkh and head muqaddams have been tried with their own schemes and false claims against
the Flood by attempting to put out the Light of God. However, God refuses to do anything but complete
His Light. You have been my Beloved since I was a teenager and, in fact, I wrote to you for this reason. Out
of pity toward you, I advise you not to be of those who want to extinguish God’s Light. I am not doing so
out of avarice regarding the manifestation of the Flood, for it will do so by the Power of God and His
Strength. Whoever wants to conceal the Flood will only make it more apparent. Whoever wants to cause
people to flee from the Owner of the Flood will only cause them to flee from him who tries to do so and
not the Flood.

Look with the eye of your heart and you will find the truth of what I have said in it. What you need to do,
that is if you can do so, is to travel spiritually until you become one of those people whom the author of the
Munya said about them, ‘A group from amongst his companions…, ’ then do so. If you are not able to do
so then stay as you are and do not do anything at all.

You must know that nothing will occur in the dominion of God except what He wants. Whoever wants
something that He doesn’t want falls from the favor of God (saqaṭa min ‘ayn Allāh).

Know that I advise you and myself to be God-conscious in secret and openly and to keep to the friendship
of the People of God through love, social intercourse, and companionship. Perhaps you will be struck by a
divine wind by doing so.

Do not claim what isn’t yours nor claim it for others for whom it doesn’t belong to either. God, be He
exalted, said: ‘Don’t speak about what you don’t have any knowledge about.’ [17:36] Whoever wants honor
in both worlds then he should know that all honor belongs to God. God’s love is known through the love of
His people. His people are the ‘Ārifoon. Your neighbor, al-Ḥāj Muḥammad Zaynab is an ‘Ārif of God, be
He exalted. I don’t know any other ‘Ārif like him. Accompany him for God’s sake, by God, and in God. By
doing so you will benefit from him, and your students will benefit from you. Nothing in this world or the

hereafter will harm you. If you don’t do so then nothing at all will ever harm God. You will come to know in
this world or in the hereafter that I don’t love you for some personal benefit that I might gain for doing so.
On this day, I don’t love anything (for its own sake). God is a Trustee over what I say.

May peace envelop you all—and I especially designate my father’s true murid al-Ḥāj and his brother with this
supplication.

Ibrāhīm ibn al-Ḥāj ‘Abdullāh al-Tijānī

1931

Kawsī, Senegal

TITRE: On Gathering for the Daily Wazifa and Spending One’s Time Offering ‘Salatul Fatihi’

In the Name of Allah, The Most Gracious, The Most Merciful
All praise and thanks belongs to Allah, The Lord of all the worlds. The Most Gracious, The Most Merciful.
The Master of the Day of Judgment. After this:

This letter is written to our beloved brothers and sisters in the city of Fez, Morocco--the abode of our
beloved and sincere disciple, the Gnostic who is completely annihilated in the love of Allah, His
Messenger(SAWS), Shaykh Ahmad al-Tijani(RA) and his Secret. The noble Muqaddam with special
permission (Idhn al-Khas) in the Tariqa Tijaniyya--the Essence of Divine Secrets (Dhat al-Asrar
ar-Rabbaniyya)--and for these (noble descriptions) let the strivers strive! The perfect master, Sidi Al Hajj
Saalim.

As-Salaamu Alaykum wa Rahmatullah Ta’ala wa Barakatuh, a greeting which is supported by the Madad of
our master Ahmad al-Tijani(RA). After humbly praying to Allah Ta’ala with supplications for myself and for
you, asking that He guide us all to that which He loves and is pleased with, and that He bestow upon us the
wellness and felicity of both this life and the next! My advice to myself and to you all is to have conscious
awareness (Taqwa) of Allah--in both public and private--for that is the secret of secrets! The (basic meaning
of Taqwa is) to obey the commands and avoid the prohibitions of Allah, outwardly and inwardly! “O you
who believe! Obey Allah and obey the Messenger, and those of you who are in authority.”(4:59).

The most important of the commands of Allah is the performance of the five (5) daily Salat in congregation,
after the prerequisite purification with water--except for the one with a valid excuse for Tayammum. Of
equal importance is the command to perform the daily Wazifa in congregation with the brethren, as
congregation is a condition for its (correct) performance. Whosoever abandons the Wazifa or abandons the
congregational recital has surely become cut off from the Tariqa Tijaniyya, and we seek refuge in Allah from
that!

It is also important that you spend your moments sending abundant prayers and salutations upon the
Prophet(SAWS) with “Salatul Fatihi Lima Ughliq”, and I especially advise you to do this at night and the last
one-sixth (1/6th) of the night is the best! Verily, it has been narrated that in every night there is an ‘hour’
wherein prayers are answered, and that is the ‘hour’ in which the Real manifests Himself (Tajjali al-Haqq) to
accept the supplications and other acts of worship. This ‘hour’ is hidden in the different parts of the night,
but it is thought that this ‘hour’ is in the last sixth of the night.

I advise you to occupy your time in the remembrance of Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He! I also urge all of
you to take every opportunity to attend the gatherings of Dhikr, especially when the seniors (Kabir) are
present! They are a people whose company will never bring misery! Allah Ta’ala says, “O you who believe!
Remember Allah with much remembrance.”(33:41), and I guarantee all of you to reach the degree of
“much”! Know that if each of you had one hundred thousand tongues whereby you made Dhikr with,
silently and audibly, day and night--you would not attain the degree of “much” in the Presence of Allah
Ta’ala!

It has been narrated that the Prophet(SAWS) said, “This world has been cursed, and everything in it is
cursed, except the remembrance of Allah and its people.” Therefore do not pay any attention to the
speech of the enemies of the Deen--those who run away from the remembrance of Allah! They are a
people who have been driven away (from the Presence of Allah), and we seek refuge in Allah from that! It
is mandatory for an intelligent person to show mercy and compassion upon his own soul and to (save his)
Deen by fleeing from such (critics of Dhikr) in the manner you would flee from a lion!
There can be no benefit in keeping company with a person who has been driven away by the Real! In fact,
there is absolutely no benefit, but rather harm!
﻿
I advise all of you to be obedient to whatever your Muqaddam orders you to do, in the way of good or
prohibiting you from what is disliked, for the sake of Allah and by Allah. Be for Allah and Allah will be for
you! Be with Allah and Allah will be with you! These are two guarantors for your safety and security from
every type of evil and corruption, because Allah is far exalted above evil and corruption!
Whosoever has to ask, let him ask of Allah! Whosoever needs assistance, let him seek the assistance of
Allah! Whosoever has a desire, let him seek its fulfillment from Allah! By Allah, there is nothing with
anyone else (with which to benefit you)--either inwardly or outwardly--either in this world or the life to
come!

You should know that Allah--the Divine Conductor of Existence--has driven mankind towards their
destruction and no one is saved except the one who has been blessed to love our master, Shaykh al-Khatm
Ahmad al-Tijani(RA)! This love is a guarantor that you will become a Gnostic (‘Arif), due to the guarantee
given by the Master of Existence (Sayyid al-Wujud)!

O my brothers, you should know that the believers are like a solid cemented structure, each brick standing
upon the other. A believer is the brother to his fellow believer, and your Wali is only Allah, His
Messenger(SAWS) and the believing men and women! Abu Hurayra (RA) has narrated that the Messenger
of Allah(SAWS) said, “Do not try to find fault with each other, do not spy on one another, do not vie with
one another, do not envy one another, do not be angry with one another, do not turn away from one
another, and be servants of Allah, brothers to one another, as you have been commanded. A Muslim is the

brother of a Muslim, he does him no wrong, nor does he let him down, nor does he despise him.” This
especially applies to the companions of our Shaykh Ahmad al-Tijani(RA), who said:

“Verily, we have a degree in the Presence of Allah which reaches such a height that I am forbidden to
divulge its reality to you. If I were to express it, the masters of truth and gnosis would be unanimous in
killing me (declaring me guilty of unbelief) to say nothing of other people. It is not the degree that I have
mentioned to you. No indeed, it is beyond that! Among the special traits of peculiarity of my unique station
is that whosoever is not on guard against disturbing the hearts and minds of our companions will be
banished from nearness with Allah and he will be deprived of what He has bestowed upon him and he will
ultimately face destruction.”

He also said, “I advise each of the Muqaddams to spread the robe of concealment over every defect and
flaw and to pardon and forgive the mistakes of the brethren. Whenever you see a spark of evil cropping up
between the brethren, you must rush to put it out. I order all of you to be obedient to whatever your
Muqaddam commands you of good and to hasten to what will bring reconciliation between the brethren. I
warn each of you about looking into each other's worldly affairs, or from desiring the possessions of the
brethren, knowing that Allah (alone) is the One Who bestows and He is the One who withholds; He is the
One who humiliates and He is the One who exalts.”

I advise all of you to hold to this letter and what it contains, and I ask Allah that He rectify our spiritual state
and our destiny, and I ask that He grant us sincerity in our worshipful service (‘Ubudiyya) and help us to
fulfill the rights of Lordship (Rububiyya). I ask that He be a Guardian over us and that He cause us to die
with the love of Shaykh al-Khatm Ahmad al-Tijani(RA) and that He gather us with his group in the
company of the Prophets and Messengers in the vicinity of the Master of Existence(SAWS), in the highest
portion of ‘Illiyun! Salaam.
﻿
Transcribed by Sidi Ali Cisse from the dictation of our Shaykh and Teacher, Mawlana Ibrahim ibn AlHajj
Abdullahi al-Tijani
1350H/1931-1932

TITRE: The Obligation to Refrain from Unveiling the Secrets

In The Name of Allah, The Most Gracious, The Most Merciful

May the peace and blessings of Allah be upon our master Muhammad, the guide to the Straight Path of
Allah. All thanks and praise belongs to Allah, Who said in the Glorious Qur’an--the book which no
falsehood can come to it from before it or after it--and it is the Firm Rope of Allah and His Clear Guidance
which He sent down as a mercy to the entire creation, to the people of the past and to the contemporaries:
“Let there arise out of you a group of people inviting to all that is good, enjoining Al-Ma’ruf and forbidding
Al-Munkar. It is they who are the successful ones.” (3:104); “There is no good in most of their secret talks
except him who orders Sadaqah, or Al-Ma’ruf, or conciliation between mankind; and he who does this,
seeking the good pleasure of Allah, We shall give him a great reward.”(4:114); “Why do not the rabbis and
the learned men forbid them from uttering sinful words and from eating illegal things? Evil indeed is that
which they have been performing.”(5:63).

May the peace and blessings of Allah be upon the Messenger of Allah--the guide and the rightly guided, who
said: “I and the entire host of Prophets have spoken to people according to their understanding.” and he
said: “Speak to people according to their understanding! Do you intend to make them disbelieve in Allah
and His Messenger?”

May Allah be pleased with the Seal of the Saints, al-Khatm Ahmad al-Tijani(RA), who said: “Whosoever
speaks to people without permission (Idhn) will be driven away and deprived!” We seek refuge in Allah from
overstepping the boundaries of Allah or from underestimating His inviolability.

After this: From the poor, weak, and ignorant servant who is negligent in realizing the honor, majesty and
exalted Essence (of Allah)--Shaykh Ibrahim ibn Al-Hajj Abdullahi al-Tijani--to all of my beloved Tijani
brethren wherever they may be, especially to those who have smelled the fragrant scent of the Realities (man
shama minhum ra’ihatul haqiqa), with special reference to the people of “Taiba Bittien”--may Allah protect
it & its inhabitants--As-Salaamu Alaykum wa Rahmatullah Ta’ala wa Barakatuh!

I am advising myself and all of you to have conscious awareness of Allah (Taqwa)--in public and in
private--and to occupy yourselves with Allah to the exclusion of everything other than Him!

I am advising all of you to preserve the obligations of the Sacred Law and to not neglect the rights of the
Lord. Most important among them is the five (5) daily Salat, along with safeguarding all of its prerequisite
conditions--such as performing them on time and in congregation! Be careful to safeguard and maintain the
obligatory Awrad of the Tariqa Tijaniyya, especially the daily Wazifa--along with its condition of performing
it in Jama’at, or congregation! Whosoever performs it by himself, having the ability to join the Jama’at, or
congregation, has not fulfilled the condition of its performance. By this is a person known to be a Tijani.
Whosoever does not act in accordance with what we have said is not a Tijani! Whosoever is neglectful in
this has not smelled the fragrant scent of Sufism and being a Faqir!

I am advising everyone who has smelled the fragrant scent of the special Tawhid al-Khass to remain silent
(& refrain from speaking of it to just anyone) and to avoid the gatherings of the common folk--those who
do not gather in obedience to Allah Ta’ala. I am especially warning you against speaking of Tawhid al-Khass
and its secrets in front of them. You should know that to unveil the secrets of Lordship (al-Asrar
ar-Rububiyya) to those who remain veiled (al-Mahjubin) is more serious in the Presence of Allah than doing
what is Haram! “Indeed in the Messenger of Allah you have a good example to follow, for him who hopes
for (the Meeting with) Allah and the Last Day, and remembers Allah much.” (33:21).

You also have a good example to follow in your Shaykh Ahmad al-Tijani(RA) who used to conceal the
secrets, and who used to frequently recite a poem which says: “With me, the secret is locked in a house
whose key has been lost and whose doors are shut! Do not give the secret except to one who has your full
confidence, for to most people the secret is not suitable!” He also used to say: “The breast of the liberated
men is the graveyard of the secrets! (Sudur al-Ahrar Qubur al-Asrar).” You also have a good example to
follow in the writer of this letter, the poor and despicable servant of Allah, who has possessed this
knowledge (of Tawhid al-Khass) for a long time and you never heard any mention, or indication of it from

me--which would single me out among my neighbors or loved ones--until the command of Allah Ta’ala
came to me!

I thank and praise Allah for that, because we are the chiefs among the Malamatiyya and our way is to
conceal our spiritual station and our miraculous feats! The Malamatiyya draw no special attention to
themselves and each one is engaged in his trade or work. They make no claim of laudable advantage over
the common folk, nor do they unveil their performance of miracles or their knowledge of the unseen, as
that is considered the menstruation of men!

We are concerned with the unveiling of light, not the unveiling of darkness (al-Kashf al-Nurani laa
Zulmani). Our sign of miracles are to be found in our hearts and not on the horizons, as we are the
inheritors of Muhammad (SAWS) and the Muhammadan inheritance are the miracles of the heart--which is
the constant increase of knowledge, spiritual states, and experiential “tasting” with the passing of every
breath! This is alluded to in the saying of the Most High, “We shall show them Our Signs in the horizons
and in their own selves, until it becomes manifest to them that He is the Absolute Reality!”(41:53).

You should know that I am free & clear of every spiritually enraptured person (Majdhub) who does not
continue to travel the path as a Salik! To speak to people before permission is your apparent and clear
destruction (Halak Mubin) and it is the evidence of your false claim (to be spiritually illuminated). The
servant who has witnessed the Real and His Oneness does not speak about it (without Idhn), nor does he
point out his own annihilation. The spiritually enraptured person who speaks (about his state without
permission) does not gain anything by way of increase, and I will not assist him in his disobedience of Allah
Ta’ala.

The love of appearance (Hubb az-Zuhur) will only prevent you from coming before the people, and I am
(only) the servant of the Divine Presence--al-Hamdulillah--and no one can take anything away from me, nor
do I have a need for any reward or thanks from anyone! The reward I am seeking is that you become
completely devoted to Allah, for Allah, and by Allah, without ever turning aside to follow your whims,
fancies, and passions! Your speaking to others before receiving permission is (only) your following foul
passions and ego. “So turn in repentance to your Creator and kill yourselves, that will be better for you with
your Creator.”(2:54).

I pray that Allah gather all of our hearts in the perfection of His Gnosis and that He guide and protect us
all! Salaam.

Shaykh Ibrahim ibn Al-Hajj Abdullahi al-Tijani Kossi, Senegal 1349H/1930

— From the Discourses of Shaykh Al-Islam Al-Ḥājj Ibrāhīm Niasse (RA). Compiled by Shaykh Ahmad Abu'l Fat'hi (Maiduguri, Nigeria) and Muhammad Abdullahi al-Tijani al-Ibrahimi (Georgia, Atlanta, USA).

TITRE: On The Slaves’ Preserving their Thoughts, and Especially the Awliya’

In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful. May Allah’s blessing and peace be upon His
Messenger, his family and his noble companions. To proceed:
This letter reaches the hand of the most precious and highest of people in my sight, the receptacle of
sciences and secrets, my son and promise, who is a Shaykh in all the degrees, possessed of uncommon tastes
and marvels, to whom Allah has inspired integrity of conduct and made Himself his only concern, while
making others concerned with selfish interests, vanities and seeking greatness in the eyes of people without
seeking it in the eyes of their Lord, the Hajj Muhammad Zaynab. As-salamu alaykum warahmatullah
wabarakatuh, also informing you that your letter has reached me and I have rejoiced at the healing of your
ailment that had worn me out in worry, praise and thanks to Allah. Perhaps your long illness will not be
followed by an interruption in Allah the Great’s house, because I have imposed on you a duty of praise and
thankfulness: to gather all the murids, men and women, free their hearts and inform them on my behalf that
I remind them of Allah and of the pledge that is between us of filling His house with the performance of
the obligations at all times, of being for Allah by rejecting everything other than Him in all movements and
moments of rest, in private and in public, of behaving properly with you and with all the dependants of the
Shaykh under you, each in accordance with his standing, precedence, age and knowledge. Deal with people
according to their station. You must love each other and respect all the Shaykh’s companions, for that is, by
Allah, where many err. Whoever has fallen in their thoughts with that which does not please the Shaykh
could even be disciplined for that. Flee from all disobedience in the outward and in the inward, because
disobedience to Allah’s commands is the clearest indicator of distance from Him, and refuge is only with
Allah. You must return to Allah at every glance because all worries, afflictions and grief are caused by
heedlessness of Allah. That is why I said that I saw all evil, in religion, in this life and in the next, in
associating partners with Allah, while all good lies in being free from associating partners with Allah and
having a single aim. “Allah gave the example of a man who has many masters always quarrelling with each
other and of a man who belongs wholly to a man. Are they equal in example?” (Surah al-Zumar: 29)
Know that the Shaykh’s Faydah is like the clouds. What is sought from them are the fruits, not merely the
falling of rain. Look for how the fruits are sought from the physical gardens: the falling of rain does not free
the human being from the need to remove weeds and the same applies to the spiritual gardens. Tasawwuf
does not stand as intended except through tawhid and worship. Zuhd (abstinence) and waraʽ (caution)
cannot be found except with patience (sabr). Patience implementing commands, patience avoiding
prohibited things and patience with what one dislikes of destiny: this is how you can give the Real His due,
surrender to His judgment and be pleased with Allah in His actions that depend on legal capacity and those
that do not (afʽālihi l-taklīfiyyah waghayrihā). You must hold a good opinion of Allah and of His slaves.
Allah Most High says: “O you who have believed, avoid much assumption, for some assumption is sinful,
and do not spy on or backbite each other.” (Surah al-Hujurat: 12)
You must attend the gatherings of good, for a single gathering of good atones for two thousand
thousand evil gatherings. The good gatherings are for example the gathering of those who know through
Allah, the gatherings of dhikr and a fortiori the Wazifah, because it is obligatory, not voluntary, and its
condition is the congregation, so whoever did it alone is as if he had not done it. You must raise your
aspiration with Allah and seek increase in every moment and instant, outwardly and inwardly. Allah said to
the one of whose upbringing and instruction He took care personally – Most High – in the first things that
He revealed to him in the world of senses: “Read” (Surah al-ʽAlaq: 1). After that He made him travel by
night, showed him His signs, manifested to him with the perfection of the Essence, gave him the knowledge
of the previous and later people, added for him onto that and said to him, after all this: “Say: My Lord,
increase me in knowledge” (Surah TaHa: 114). From this, you can know that the slave can never encompass
what his master and patron has. Nobody who suffices with Allah and knows that what is with Him is
everlasting becomes low. Rather, that which you seek is in front of you.
With all that, I am pleased with you at many times for the affair of the zawiyah, my brother and your brother
and of all the neighbours. Had I not known that you would act upon my admonition, I would not have sent
it to you. I then ask Allah – Blessed and Exalted – to take you by the hand to the perfection of His
knowledge and to take care of us and you, for He takes care of the righteous. Peace.

This was written by Ibrahim b. al-Hajj ʽAbd Allah al-Tijani in Kos, returning the greeting of peace to you
and whoever is part of your wholesome gathering. 1350 AH.

TITRE: On Encouraging Striving to Perform Religious Obligations

Alhamdu lillah and may blessing and peace be upon the Messenger of Allah. To proceed:
Indeed Allah has decreed all affairs in their measures with His hand and its origin and goodness lies in what
Allah has chosen. I am staying in Kaolack with the intention of spending the autumn there. I advise you and
myself to strive in the religious obligations such as purification, prayer at the designated time, the wird and
the wazifah in its time with the condition of the congregation for the prayer, the wazifah and the dhikr of
Friday, and in observing the rights of those entitled to them among your parents, relatives, neighbours, the
companions of Shaykh and all believers in general and specifically the scholars from the two people [men
and jinn]. You must strive in seeking halal provision in obedience to Allah – the Most High – and do not
neglect to fix your intention in all your affairs. Beware of falling short of what is due to the divine. I advise
whoever claims a state with Allah to continue striving in purifying their soul so that their soul will not tell
them that they have reached a station that frees from the need of good works. Abu al-Qasim al-Junayd –
may Allah have mercy on him –, who is the Imam of this path, said about a group of people who said that the
burden of obligations has fallen off them and claimed that they were a means toward arriving and they had
arrived: “They said the truth about having arrived, but they have arrived to Hell.” The one who steals and
fornicates is better than the one who believes that. Were I to live for a thousand years, I would not leave
anything of my wirds, except due to a legitimate sharʽi excuse. Work hard in the gardens for Allah and with
Allah or with the intention that the slaves of Allah and the Muslims may benefit from them or with the
intention of earning the halal for yourselves and your dependents, everyone according to their degree and
understanding about Allah, Majestic and Exalted. I ask Allah, Blessed and Exalted, by the Seal of His
prophets and the Seal of His saints, to apportion for us and for you sincerity in servanthood to Him and the
upholding of the rights of His Lordship and to treat us and you with His kindness and generosity. Indeed
He is the One in charge of that and capable of doing it. Peace.

TITRE: Concerning Tarbiyya and Spiritual Illumination (Fath)

I am sending a greeting of peace, which is free of vanity, nonsense, and sin, to my noble son, the lofty Sharif, “Shaykhani” Manna Abba wuld Tulba. I have received your letter, which conveys your state of well-being,

and this is the most valuable news I have received!

All praise and thanks belong to Allah! We are also in good health and well-being, and we are enjoying
constant increase—both outwardly and inwardly! All praise and thanks belong to Allah! As for what you
mentioned concerning the growth and increase of disciples (Murideen), we thank and praise Allah, who has
caused the increase of Iman in the Ummah!

As for the question of spiritual training (Tarbiyya)—may Allah guide us and you—know that Tarbiyya in our
Tariqa is by the spiritual energy (Himma) of Shaykh al-Khatm Ahmad al-Tijani (may Allah be pleased with
him), the one who said:

“Whosoever would know me, must know me by myself alone!”

So there is nothing for an authorized Muqaddam to do except explain the conditions (of the Tariqa) and its
correct Adab. Likewise, there is nothing for a disciple (Murid) to do except to preserve and maintain the
known religious obligations and perform the obligatory remembrances {Wird al-Lazim, Wazifa, Dhikr
al-Jumuʿah}—with full conviction that the Wird al-Lazim is the greatest secret of Tariqa Tijaniyya!

A disciple must hasten to its performance and diligently continue to perform whatever extra Awrad/Adhkar
he/she is able to obtain permission for after the Wird al-Lazim—desiring nothing except the Noble
Countenance of Allah—not anything in this life or the next world, nor any spiritual station among the
various Maqamat—but only witnessing the Bounty and Grace of Allah!

A Murid must persist in having a good opinion (of Allah and His servants) and completely submit all of
one's affairs to Him. If you are able to persevere in this without any other goal, you must eternally praise and
thank Allah for it!

The worst condition for a disciple to have—and the most depraved state of worshipful service (Qadih fi’l
‘Ubudiyya) and the greatest shame & disgrace of the ego—is when a person worships and remembers Allah
with a sense of entitlement and expectation of spiritual illumination (Fath) today or tomorrow or in one
week or in one month or in one year! No one should think to deserve or merit anything from Allah, but
should think that He is deserving to be worshipped for His Essence alone!

Whosoever feels entitled to experience spiritual illumination or feels it to be slow in coming should repent
to Allah! You must know that if you spent your entire life in the worship and remembrance of Him and then
experienced the Fath for a single moment, you would realize in that single moment what is equal to your
entire life or even greater!

Even if the spiritual illumination never occurs, you should be content that your life was spent in the
remembrance of Allah, for there is nothing due from a disciple except to thank and praise Allah in every
state! I am asking Allah Ta’ala on behalf of myself, you, and all of the brethren, that He grant us safety, good
health & contentment with the decree of Divine Providence. Salaam.
Ibrahim ibn Al-Hajj Abdullahi al-Tijani
Kaolack, Senegal
1354H/1935

Ps… As for my spiritual support (‘Umdati) in the Tariqa Tijaniyya, you should consult my book entitled
“Kashif al-Ilbas” and understand well!!

TITRE: Encouraging Purification, Perfection of the Salah and of the Wird, and Men’s Gathering for the Wadhifah

From the city of Kaolack, on the 25th of Rabi’ al-Thani 1356, to all the beloveds.
Bismillahir-Rahmanir-Rahim. Al-Hamdu Lillahi, Rabbil-Alamin. Ar-Rahman ar-Rahim. Maliki Yawmid-Din.
As for what follows:
May the purest of greetings and ever-increasing blessings from the madad of the best of all creatures—by
the grace of the Creator of the Earth and the Heavens—find its way to the beloveds wherever they may be,
male and female, from the one who is writing to you all: the one who loves you compassionately, Ibrahim
ibn al-Hajj Abdullahi al-Tijani.
Now, I ask Allah (t.) to look at all of you with the eye of satisfaction, kindness, love, and acceptance; to
bestow on us and you hearts that are pure and ears that listen; to grant us and you success in that in which
lies His satisfaction; and to occupy us and you with that which brings benefit in both abodes.
Now, I advise you to be concerned with purification by water, perfection of the salah, and perfection of the
wird. Reflect deeply on His speech (t.), “And recite proper recitation of the Qur’an” (Qur’an 73:4): here,
Allah (t.) commands recitation and emphasizes it grammatically with the repetitive gerund. May He bestow
on us understanding from Him, out of His giving and generosity. You must also—men, not women—gather
for the wadhifah. Those who take up what I have ordered have my guarantee in life and in death, and there
is to be neither fear nor grief upon them. Salaam.

Ibrahim ibn al-Hajj Abdullahi al-Tijani—may Allah be kind to him in both abodes, Amin!
He sends this to the beloveds, wherever they may be, by means of the muqaddams.

TITRE: Urging Observation of the Obligatory Fast of Ramadan

In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the
Worlds, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful, the Owner of the Day of Judgement.

From the city of Kawlākh in the final days of Sha’abān 1352 Hijri (October 1937): [By Time, indeed,
mankind is in loss. Except those who have believed and done righteous deeds and advised each other to
truth and advised each other to patience.] (Surah al- ‘Asr)

I advise all those who listen to me to guard the performance of the obligations of Ramaḍān about which
Allah (t.) has said: [O you who believe! Observing the Fast is prescribed for you as it was prescribed for
those before you, that you may be God-conscious.] (2:183) He said (t.): [The month of Ramaḍān in which
the Quran was revealed, a guidance for mankind and clear proofs. So, whoever of you sights the month
must observe fasting in it.] 2:185 It is narrated from him, peace be upon him: ‘Islām is built upon five
things: 1) Bearing witness to the fact that there is no god but Allah and that Muḥammad is the Messenger of
Allah, 2) Establishing the prayer, 3) Paying the Zakāh, 4) Fasting the Month of Ramaḍān, and 5)
Performance of the Pilgrimage.’ It is narrated from him, peace be upon him: ‘There are three things which, if
preserved, make someone a true Friend (of Allah). Likewise, whoever fails to observe them is an enemy (of
Allah), in truth: 1) The Prayer, 2) The Fast, and 3) Avoiding major ritual impurity (al-Janāba).’

It is narrated from him, peace be upon him, that he said to the one who asked him, ‘Tell me something
beneficial,’: ‘You must fast, as it has no equivalent (in benefit).’ It is narrated from him, peace be upon him:

‘Whoever observes the fast of Ramaḍān out of sincere faith and hoping to attain Allah’s reward, all of his
past sins will be forgiven.’ It is narrated from him, peace be upon him: ‘When the month of Ramaḍān
begins, the gates of heaven are opened and the gates of the hellfire are closed and the devils are chained.’ It
is narrated from him, peace be upon him: ‘Whoever feeds a person breaking his fast will earn the same
reward as him without anything being lessened from the reward of the fasting person. Everything has its
purification (zakāh). The purification of the body is the fast.’ The statement, ‘Fasting is half of patience,’ is
also narrated from him, peace be upon him.

Fasting in some countries is superior to fasting in others because of the strength of religion in its region
and/or its weakness therein. The narration from him, peace be upon him, ‘Ramaḍān in Medīna is better
than a thousand Ramaḍāns in other places and the congregational prayer is better in Medīna than a
thousand congregational prayers in other countries,’ indicates this fact. It is also narrated from him, peace be
upon him: ‘The best of months is Ramaḍān and the most forbidden of them is Dhūl Ḥijja.’

So, listen to the commands of Allah and His Messenger. Indeed, the path of Shaikh Tijānī, may Allah be
pleased with him, which we are upon, is nothing but obedience to what Allah and His Messenger have
commanded and avoidance of what Allah and His Messenger have prohibited. Thus, whoever follows the
commandments and avoids the prohibitions is from us. Whoever fails to do so is not. Allah (t.) has said: [Let
those who oppose the command of the Prophet, peace be upon him, beware lest some trial should befall
them or a painful torment be inflicted upon them.] 24:63

Allah. Allah. Allah. Oh, Slaves of Allah! Beware of the Proprietor of the Heavens and Earth, and He who
has all benefit and harm in His hand, good deeds and bad deeds; Praise is His in the Beginning and the End.

I say this while seeking forgiveness from Allah for myself and you. Peace be upon all those who are from us
and to us. May Allah enable us to do that which He loves and is pleased with and may He treat our sick
hearts as His gift to us.

Your sympathizing brother—

Ibrāhīm ibn al-Ḥajj ‘Abdullāh al-Tijānī,

May Allah be kind to him and his beloveds, āmīn!

TITRE: The Sharifs Who Have Taken the Path of the Sufis

Al-Hamdu Lillah alone, and salah and salam on Allah’s Messenger (s.a.w.s.).
O children of the sharifs who have taken the path of the Sufis, here is some advice that I have presented to
you: take up a skilled profession by which to earn a halal living and stop seeking a living by merely going
around begging and hoping for others’ wealth—raise your aspiration above that lowly “profession.” In
Senegal, your profession should be trade, writing, teaching, or transport—not begging and hoping for
others’ wealth. Whoever does not find a way to take on one of those professions should be pleased with
poverty and contentment, and busy themselves with learning and dhikr. Exalted be He Who has said,
“Charity is for the poor who are confined in the way of Allah, who are unable to travel throughout the
land—the ignorant one considers them rich because of their restraint. You will know them by their
characteristic mark: that they do not beg others importunately” (Qur’an 2:273). In the two Sahihs is found:
“Begging will continue to be with one of you until he or she meets Allah (t.) without there being a morsel of
flesh in his or her face.” In all of the six sound hadith collections except Abu Dawud: “For one of you to
carry a bundle of wood on his or her back is better than for him or her to beg from someone else who will
either give to him or her or hold back.” In Abu Dawud and Nisa’i: “Whoever guarantees to me that they will
not beg people for anything, I guarantee Paradise for them.” In Nisa’i: “Whoever begs while having 40
dirhams of their own is an importunate beggar.” And there are other hadiths like this. Allah is the Ultimate
Provider, Owner of Power, Firm. I have offered you advice for Allah’s sake. As-Salamu ‘alaikum wa
Rahmatullahi wa Barakatuh.

This was written by your brother, who loves you, Ibrahim ibn al-Hajj Abdullahi al-Tijani in the first few days of Shawwal
1356 AH—may Allah be kind to him, Amin!

TITRE: Needs Title

From Kaolack, 27 Jumadah al-Ula 1363, to Dakar.

Al-Hamdu Lillah, Who veiled the secret of khususiyyah through the existence of humanity. May the most
perfect salah and peace be upon the best of creation and his people, who emigrated in Allah, strived along
his side in Allah as He deserves, sacrificed everything to please the Creator Who is worthy of worship on the
earth and in the heaven, got their nufus used to standing with His beloved in all aspects, drew their swords,
endured patiently all struggles, tribulations and afflictions, and praised Allah with the best praises.

As for what follows: to the noble son and well-cultured youth, Ahmad b. al-Khalifah Muhammad b.
al-Khalifah H̩amadi Bukār – may mercy never cease falling like rain on his tomb in the evening and early
morning. As-Salamu alaykum wa Rahmatullahi wa Barakatuh, and His pleasure and purity through the
madad of our patron, the Tijani Seal.

I praise before you Allah, Whom there is no god but Him, with all His praises, those known to me and
those unknown. I seek refuge in Him from distance after proximity, evil destiny, the enemies’ gloating and
deprivation after giving. I seek refuge in Him from that I should mislead or be misled, oppress or be
oppressed, treat others foolishly or be thus treated. “Save me and my children from that we should worship
idols. My Lord, they have indeed misguided many people, so those who follow me are from me and those
who disobey me, then you are forgiving and merciful.” (Quran 14:35-6)

Your embellished writing has reached me and in it there is the Tablet of Lights [jadwal al-anwār] that the
Sayyid of Existence (s.a.a.w.s.) taught to our Shaykh, the Hidden Qutb, the Sealed Barzakh, the Known
Muhammadan Seal, Sayyiduna Shaykh Abu al-ʽAbbas Ahmad b. Muhammad al-Tijani al-Hasani (rd.a.a.), to
the exclusion of the other Muhammadan Qutbs. You sent it to me as a gift (and none rejects a gift except
someone despicable), but my anxiety for you has grown when I saw it in your handwriting, while you have
no permission to see it, let alone write it! I was given permission for it by my master, Ahmad Sukayrij
(rd.a.a.) through a sound idhn. I have not given permission for it to anybody except our beloved Hajj ʽUmar
Kano. I gifted to him a copy I had due to the many people envious of him and his distance from me, but I
have not given permission for it to anyone else, because those who deserve it are few. This is despite the fact
that those who busied themselves with the secret sciences, which our Shaykh al-Tijani (rd.a.a.) calls “the evil
sciences”, have copied this Tablet and write it down for people seeking the debris of this world. That is the
closest thing there is to selling one’s deen for dunya. Therefore, I seek protection for me and for you from
that you should write it down for anybody, because I do not give permission for it, I do not give permission
for it and, again, I do not give permission for it. As for what you described to me of your hal, I have sensed
from it the scent of the ruh’s resolve to use the Tablet of Lights, but to be put forward even before having
been weaned would be less harmful than that. As for your busying yourself sometimes with this and

sometimes with that to repel the different hals, “Allah gave the example of a man who has many masters
always quarrelling with each other and of a man who belongs wholly to a man. Are they equal in example?
Al-Hamdu Lillah. Rather, most of them do not know.” (Qur’an 39:29) As for the muqaddam al-Hajj ‘Umar,
he is one I am fully pleased with. Salam.

Ibrahim b. al-Hajj ‘Abdullah al-Tijani

This was written by the servant of the Hadrah Ibrahimiyyah, ‘Ali Cisse, copying it from the handwriting of
our Shaykh and support, Shaykh al-Hajj Ibrahim b. al-Hajj ‘Abdullah al-Tijani (rd.a.a. and may Allah benefit
us with him). Amin.

TITRE: Advice to Patiently Bear the Negative Criticism of the Enemies of Tariqah

In The Name of Allah, The Most Gracious, The Most Merciful. May the Peace and Blessings of Allah be
upon His Noble Prophet Muhammad(SAWS), the Best of Creation. All thanks and praise belongs to
Allah—the Absolutely Perfect Being in His Essence, Attributes, Names, and Actions—throughout the entirety
of His manifestations (Tajalla). May the Peace and Blessings of Allah be upon the Axis of the Orbit of
Divine Beauty (Qutb Falak al-Jamal) and the Essence of the Majestic Presence (‘Ain Hadrat al-Jalal). May the
perfect Pleasure of Allah be upon the complete inheritor (of the Prophet) in each of his states, in speech and
deeds—the caller to Allah—and his secret (Shaykh Ahmad al-Tijani,RA). After this:

To my brethren in Allah, in the Messenger, and in Shaykh Ahmad al-Tijani—the blessed Muqaddam, Al-Hajj
Salim and his nephew, Muqaddam Al-Hajj Mu’az: As-Salaamu Alaykum wa Rahmatullah Ta’ala wa
Barakatuh! I am very happy to hear that your condition is being solely focused on Allah and being
completely occupied with Him to the exclusion of everything else, al-Hamdulillah! I am advising you to
remain in the service of the Real and to patiently bear the negative criticism of the enemies of the Divine
Presence, for the good end belongs to those with conscious awareness of Allah! “O you who believe! If you
help Allah, He will help you and make your foothold firm.”(47:7). The most severely tested (by Allah) are
the Prophets and then the Saints.

You should know that ever since my youth, (even) when I possessed little knowledge and was very weak in
the Deen, I have been tested by Allah with the most severe testing! I have been (falsely) accused of kufr,
fraud, making halal what is haram, cutting off filial relations, corrupting the Tariqa Tijaniyya by introducing
what does not belong in it, of inventing lies against Allah, of being a magician, and being insane. Things
have been done to me which my pen cannot even write!

However, I remained patient for the sake of Allah and I regarded the test accordingly. I raised my spiritual
energy (Himma) above the entirety of creation until I had no concern for the (negative opinions) of anyone.
I came to know that no one could harm or benefit me (except Allah), and that nothing existed except that
which He willed—and in this (way of thinking) is abundant goodness! He came to my aid with help from
Himself and He saved me from the evil of my enemies, and I continued my Suluk in this Tariqa. In short
time they all became regretful, by the Might and Power of Allah!

I bore patiently because I knew that a time was coming in the future (where things would be different)—and
with me the future is just like the past!

 Whosoever does not make Suluk just as you are making it will soon be full of regrets! I am sending your
brother and your friend, Abu Bakr Jaj to visit with you all as my deputy, and I am praying that Allah will aid
and assist all of us with His Bountiful Grace and that He guide us to that which He loves and is pleased
with. I ask that He grant us the healing for what ails our hearts and that He cover us with His Love, His
Choice and His Pleasure, until we come to be the neighbor of the Messenger of Allah(SAWS) in the highest
regions of ‘Illiyin! Ameen! Salaam.

Reproduced by Sidi Ali Cisse from the handwriting of our Shaykh Ibrahim ibn Al-Hajj Abdullahi
al-Tijani—with his permission.

Medina-Baye, Kaolack

TITRE: Urging the Muqaddams to Guide and Lead the Brethren and Advise them in the Deen and the Tariqah

In The Name of Allah, The Most Gracious, The Most Merciful

All thanks and praise belong to Allah, Who said in His Wise Book “O you who believe! If you help Allah,
He will help you and make your foothold firm.” (47:7). May the peace and blessings of Allah be upon the
one who was addressed with: “And verily, you (Muhammad) are on an exalted character.” (68:4) and also
with: “So stand firm and upright as you are commanded.” (11:112). He is indeed the guide to the straight
path. May Allah be pleased with the Seal (of the Saints) al-Khatm Ahmad al-Tijani(RA), the one who
advised the Muqaddams with more than he advised the Murids! After this:

I am very pleased with the senior Muqaddams who are affiliated with us, and I am asking that Allah,
Glorious & Exalted is He, take care of us and reward you all from His Bounty in both this life and in the
Hereafter.

I am advising all of you (in the spirit of) love and compassionate mercy—and only for the sake of Allah—that
you diligently work hard to convey right guidance to the brethren and to always advise each other in the
Deen and in the Tariqa. This advice should be given after you have begun with yourself (first). In other
words, do not order someone to do something until after you have already done it yourself! Also, do not
prevent or check someone until after you have already restrained and checked yourself.

Do not be lazy or slack in this as you will lead many people astray, because nothing is more harmful to the
common folk than the blunder or mistake of the superior or high-ranking person! May Allah pardon all of
us.

Do not cut off the link between the Murids and their exemplar (Shaykh Tijani), for to do so will sever the
connection of spiritual support (Madad) from them! I am advising the senior Muqaddams to have regular
attendance in the Zawiya for the five (5) daily Salat and the evening Wazifa, even if you happen to be the
only one! If you act in accordance with this, perhaps Allah will decree that others will join you (in the
Zawiya) by His Might and Power! I am also advising you to keep the secrets, even those related to the
Dunya, for whosoever conceals his secret will become the master of his affair. Persist in having patience and
contentment with the Divine Decree.

I am advising you to guide each other, love one another, and visit each other for the sake of Allah. Sacrifice
for one another, and continue to make service to the Shaykhs (Khidma) and to have love for them, for they
have said: “Whosoever serves us, we grant him ascendancy.” Do not hate one another, do not be jealous of
one another, do not desert or boycott one another, and be servants of Allah as brethren to one another.

Every senior Muqaddam should strive to build or establish a Zawiya in a city with a lot of Tijani brothers—in
accordance with his ability and the situation—to establish the five (5) daily Salat and when it is easy they
should congregate with the beloved (Al-Ahbab) companions after every Dhikr Yaum al-Jumu'ah or
whenever people have the ability to do so, to help and assist one another in the proper upkeep of the
Zawiya, such as its furnishing, etc. I am giving you all the command and permission (Idhn) for that.

I am advising you all to be on guard against having a bad opinion of Allah and His servants or with the
vicissitudes of time, for He is Time! There is no difference between the past and the future (with Him). I
advise each of you to increase your standing at the door of Allah with supplication for yourselves and for
your loved ones, and especially for the common worshippers (al-‘Ibad wa ‘Amatuhum).

I advise you all to offer plenty Salat al-Fatihi and the least amount which a senior Muqaddam should make is
six thousand (6000) in the morning and another six thousand (6000) in the evening. The minimum amount
of your Nafila Salat should be fifty (50) Raka’t between the morning and evening. I advise you all to offer
one hundred (100) Salat al-Fatihi as a gift (Hadiya) to our master Rasulullah (SAWS), and one thousand
(1000) “Ya Latif” morning and evening. I advise you to offer two hundred (200) Salat al-Fatihi on every
Friday night. I recommend you to give away some Sadaqa everyday, even if it's only a piece of bread! I am
advising you all to honor the Shurafa’, the People of Allah, the Saints, the Shaykhs, the ’Ulama and the
students of knowledge.

I advise you all to honor the Muqaddams of your Shaykh (Ahmad al-Tijani), because that is a part of
honoring him! Honoring the Shaykhs is a part of honoring Allah, and is a cause for your success in this life
and in the Hereafter.

Be of good cheer, for Allah says: “And certainly, We shall test you with something of fear, hunger, loss of
wealth, lives and fruits, but give glad tidings to the patient ones; those who when afflicted with calamity, say:
‘Truly, to Allah we belong and truly, to Him we shall return.’ They are those on whom are the Salawat from
their Lord, and (they are those who) receive His Mercy, and it is they who are the rightly-guided
ones.” (2:155-157). So, perhaps the loss of fruits will be the last of the tests (from Allah), which we have been
witnessing in the last two years. All thanks and praise belong to Allah, the Lord of the worlds!

Be of assistance to one another in achieving your goals, for the Jama’at is a mercy and dissent and discord is
a punishment! I am asking Allah to look after us all, for He is guardian of the righteous. Salaam.

This has been written by your loving advisor Ibrahim ibn Al-Hajj Abdullahi al-Tijani in Kossi, Senegal.

TITRE: Needs Title

Bismillahir-Rahmanir-Rahim. Al-Hamdu Lillah, Lord of the worlds, the Compassionate, the Merciful, the
King of the Day of Judgment. May salah and peace be upon sayyiduna Muhammad and his family
appropriate to his value and great worth. As for what follows:
To our brother in Allah, our companion, honest in his love toward us, the beneficial youth, the righteous
wali, the scholar who advises with sincerity, the anger of enemies and the happiness of friends, Muhammad
b. al-Hasan Jatarah — may Allah protect him and conceal his secrets — and to all the brothers, wherever they
may be. As-Salamu alaykum wa Rahmatullahi ta’ala wa Barakatuh. From the madad of our patron, the Tijani
Seal (rd.a.a.w.a.a.b.1). Amin.
O one who is in love, your noble writing has reached me and I have understood your proper speech. I ask
Allah (t.w.t.) to pour upon us and you the seas of His sciences, maʽarif, adabs and provisions, material and
spiritual, by the rank of the junction of the divine affairs (majmaʽ al-shu’ūn) and the greatest veil (al-h̩ijāb
al-aʽz̩am) (s.a.a.w.s.).
I advise you and myself with what Allah has advised the ummahs and us in His precious Book that is not
approached by falsehood neither from the front nor from the back. He said (j.w.a.): “We have indeed
advised those who were given the Book before you and yourselves to have taqwa of Allah” (Qur’an 4:131)
and: “He has prescribed for you from the deen that which He ordered Nuh” (Qur’an 42:13), up to His
saying: “To establish the deen and not be divided therein” (Qur’an 42:13). The haqiqah of that is that your
inner be totally immersed in Allah, His greatness, majesty and beauty, while your outer is totally absorbed in
His commands. The slave should not have any portion in other than what Allah commands, sufficing and
being content with his or her Patron, being through Him free of any need for His obedience, despite striving
intensely in it. That is the straight path.
Al-Busayri said, praising his Shaykh, Abu al-‘Abbas al-Mursi (rd.a.a.m.2):

He has reached the utmost of what the expert seeks            From his Lord, while maintaining the striving of [the beginner.

It is necessary for the slaves, if they wish to be among the slaves of the Hadrah in haqiqah, outwardly and
inwardly, in dunya and akhirah, or rather for the posteternality of posteternality (abad al-abad), to be careful,
to have wirds that they hold on to and take with a sound idhn from the complete Shaykhs and that they
recite in order to obey Allah’s command. He (t.) said: “So remember Me, I remember you” (Qur’an 2:152)
and in the hadith qudsi: “I am the sitting companion of the one who remembers Me.” One should have a
complete Shaykh that one accompanies for Allah alone, not for anything else, that makes one focused on
Allah and takes one away from the frivolities of one’s nafs and of one’s caprice. One must have adab with
one’s Shaykh, one’s brothers and sisters through the Shaykh, the generality of the believers and the elite, and

with the rest of Allah’s creation according to their martabahs. One must strive against the nafs, caprice and
Shaytan. The murid’s striving consists in being patient and perseverant with the obligations in order to
perform them as it befits, being patient with what is forbidden in order to avoid it and being patient with the
bitterness of what destiny brings in order to surrender to Allah, consign the affair to Him, entrust oneself
fully to Him and be content. One must also take the nafs to account. It is with these two that one’s
scrupulousness (waraʽ) is made sound. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.a.w.s.) said: “Be scrupulous and you shall
be the most worshipful of people”, and this is what makes one’s zuhd sound. The reality of zuhd is having
zuhd in other than Allah, so that one’s tawakkul is sound, one is absent from creatures, there is presence
with Allah and closeness to Him, so that effacement (mah̩w), establishment (ithbāt), sufficiency (ghinā), baqa
through Allah by witnessing His Names, Attributes and effects (āthār) and interaction with Him alone
(taʽāmulihi wah̩dahu) are attained, purely for His Countenance as He commanded. He (t.) said: “They were
only commanded to worship Allah making their deen sincerely for Him” (Qur’an 98:5). Ma’rifah is the
unveiling of the Names of Allah and His Attributes and their consequences, muraqabah of Allah and making
one’s actions sincere for Him. Therefore, you must always keep lively the Houses of Allah by performing
the obligations in them. You must gather for the Wazifah every evening because the jama’ah is one of its
conditions for those who can find brothers and are not excused, and it guarantees the protection of every
area… Its people held onto it in jama’ah by the guarantee of our patron, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.a.w.s.),
because it does not leave even a tiny bit of the sins of the one who attends it, and afflictions are in
proportion with the sins. You must also give life to all moments or most of them or some of them with the
dhikr of Allah and salah on the Messenger of Allah (s.a.a.w.s.) with Salatul-Fatihi Lima Ughliqa, striving to
increase mutual love between the brothers in the tariqah and striving to acquire the halal. Accompany the
himmah of the Shaykh in all of that and you will attain the goal. He is with you whenever you think of him
with your heart, and that is a great secret. You should love the Shaykh, because that guarantees happiness in
the two abodes. My sayyidi, al-Tamasini, who had reached Qutbaniyyah in our tariqah, said: “I see Allah
having led existence toward destruction and nobody is safe from it except one to whom Allah has given love
of sayyiduna.” You should be patient with the annoyance that afflicts you from the tongues of the imbeciles,
pardon them and not be bothered by them, whether inwardly or outwardly. You should do this as part of
your zuhd in other than Allah, because their praise and blame, their coming to you or turning their backs on
you are all the same, since there is no one who can cause harm or benefit except Allah (s.), nor one who can
lower or raise except Him (s.), nor giver nor taker except Him (s.). “That mercy which Allah opens for
people, none can withhold, and that which He withholds, none can send after Him, and He is the Mighty
and Wise.” (Qur’an 35:2) “If Allah touches you with some harm, none can remove it except Him, and if He
wants some good for you, there is none who can reject His favour.” (Qur’an 10:107). The point is that
whoever finds Allah will not miss anything, whoever misses Him will not find anything, and the one who
finds Allah is the one who has attained Ihsan, i.e., has become absorbed in Him inwardly and has obeyed His
command outwardly. Allah (t.) said: “Indeed Allah is with those who have taqwa and those who are
muhsins.” (Qur’an 16:128) I have renewed for you the idhn to recite the obligatory and supererogatory
wirds, to impart them, to teach sacred knowledge, direct the creation by advising them and to impart the
tarbiyah to them through the outward and inward adabs of the tariqah. It is incumbent upon you to become
extinct in the Shaykh until you see that your nafs has no influence along with him. The Shaykh in our
tariqah is Shaykh al-Tijani, no one else. As-Salamu alaykum. Deliver my salam to all those you meet who
belong to our tariqah, like the mufassir Habibullahi Seck and whoever is with him, Mustafa Jam and others
and to your brother in love with us, carrier of the Book of Allah, Danwadi Jatarah and on the rest of your
assembly, each one by his name and individually. Salam. All the brothers send their salam to you. Nothing

has occurred here after you except goodness and none of the notable individuals has died except our
paternal uncle Abu Bakr Fay and Muhammad Kummu.

[FOOTNOTES]
1. Rad̩iya Llāhu ʽan-hu wa-ard̩ā-hu ʽan-nā bi-h.
2. Rad̩iya Llāhu ʽan-humā

TITRE: Urging the Earning of a Halal Living

Bismillahir-Rahmanir-Rahim. May Allah send salah upon Sayyiduna Muhammad and upon his family, as is
the due of his rank and his immense measure. Al-Hamdu Lillahi, Rabbil-Alamin. Ar-Rahman ar-Rahim.
Maliki Yawmid-Din. And salah and salam upon Sayyiduna Muhammad, the Opener, and his most noble
companions. As for what follows:
This is addressed to the noble presence of the virtuous brother and knowledgeable imam who acts on his
knowledge, the complete wali and continuation of the pious predecessors, al-Hajj Abu Bakr ibn Shaykhuna
al-Hajj. As-Salamu alaikum wa Rahmatullahi wa Barakatuh.
This is to let you know that your letter was received. The sincere advice it had from you, advising me for the
sake of Allah and to honor family ties, made me rejoice several times over, so jazak Allah khair. As for what
you mentioned regarding the people of Tayba Jass, I have written to them just to say that your letter was
received.
Know, my brother, that what constantly occupies me is enjoining the good and forbidding the evil with my
tongue, my pen, my speech, and my action—all I have people do is develop taqwa of Allah privately and
publicly by following His commands, avoiding His prohibitions, praying the five salahs in congregation,
reading the wadhifah, making dhikr of Allah privately and publicly, reciting Qur’an, and earning a halal living.
Those who follow my command are not engaged in anything other than this; as for those who do not follow
my command, I do not carry a sword—the messenger’s responsibility is nothing but clear conveyance of the
message. Allah (t.) said to Our Master, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.), “You are not one to force and
compel them, so use the Qur’an to remind whoever fears My warning” (Qur’an 50:45), “Remind, for you do
nothing but remind—you do not hold power over them” (Qur’an 88:21-2), and “Clear proofs have come to
you from your Lord, so those who see properly do so for themselves, and those who go blind do so against
themselves, and I am not one to preserve and protect you” (Qur’an 6:104). In summary, I leave no stone
unturned in my effort to advise any of Allah’s slaves who listen to my advice—those who listen to me are
neither seen nor heard doing anything except what pleases Allah and the Messenger—and to advise even
those who do not listen to me and have no connection to me.
There are two types of people: those who seek Allah and the Messenger, and those who seek nothing but
their own nufus and their base desires. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.s.) said, “Whoever’s migration was to
Allah and His Messenger, then his migration is to Allah and His Messenger; while whoever’s migration was
to get some part of the Dunya or marry some woman, then his migration is to what he migrated to.”
The one who got engaged to Maryam Jass was Ibn Matar Jor.
Do not forget me in your dua. If we meet, we shall inform you about the truth of this matter.
Salam.

TITRE: Needs Title

Al-Hamdu Lillah, who has blessed the people of tamkin [stability] and tahqiq [realization] with travelling on
the way of the Truth, the straight path. May salah and peace be upon the helping guide, the trustworthy
legislator who said: “Speak to people with what they understand.” May the greatest ridwan be upon his
concealed secret, the owner of the firm maqam, on his Family, the best party, and his Companions, who
cling to his strong rope. As for what follows:
Salam, with whose fragrance the outward appearances and ruhs of the beloved are perfumed and which
removes the worries and griefs that have covered their hearts, to all the brothers connected to us in
Tidjikdja, whether in blood or in spirit, especially those with the best traits, sayyid Muhammad Fal b.
al-Talib, may his Lord make easy all demands for him, and those like him who are sought after or seek.
As-Salamu alaykum wa Rahmatullahi ta’ala wa Barakatuh. Your precious, succinct and proper letter has
reached me and I rejoiced for you and your lofty hals. May Allah, by the rank of the best of creation, make
your hals always soar even higher than what we would love. I advise myself and you to always give sincere
counsel to the beloved ones, to extend the mantle of pardon over all slips and to think well of Allah and His
slaves. It has in fact been said: “Indeed, something in which, if one is mistaken about it, there is no sin, and
if one is right, there is a full reward, is better than something in which, if one is right, there is no reward and,
if one is wrong, there is a sin.” The first is to think good of your brother: if he is not as you thought, you
have not sinned, and if he is as you thought, you are rewarded. The second is your bad opinion of your
brother: if he is not as you thought, you have sinned, and if he is as you thought, there is no reward in that.
However, the fath is a holy breeze that pulls the heart of the slave to the Hadrah. If he or she continues in
mujahadah and purifying himself or herself from lowly character traits, it stays; otherwise it flies away, and
the slave returns to the darkness, becoming like one who has seen something they love in their sleep and
then woke up. There is no harm in rebuking those who wish to benefit from revealing the secrets, because
the revelation of the secrets of lordship among the loved ones is worse in the sight of Allah than the haram.
Every maqam is a veil for what is beneath it. This is why we do not speak to a murid while he or she is in
the presence of somebody else, nor do we mention any maqam in front of those who have smelt a maqam’s
fragrance, if they have not reached it, because those who have smelled the fragrance of Ahadiyyah claim to
have reached every maqam they hear about and believe to have become realized in it. Beware of revealing
the secret to other than its people, because it is necessary to conceal secrets and manifest the Shari’ah of the
Chosen Prophet.

Only those worthy of trust conceal the secret, For the secret is concealed with the best of people.

It has been said: “Those who have known Allah derive no pleasure from the creation; those who have
known Dunya derive no pleasure from their worldly life; and those whose basirah has been opened are
astonished and cannot speak.”
I recommend to you taqwa in private and in public, for it is the provision that delivers one to one’s goal, the
safe path and the fast mount. You must take care of the obligations. Among the most important of them

there are to guard one’s prayers—while doing constantly dhikr at all moments—in their time, in jama’ah and
with purification through water, the Wazifah in the zawiyah with one’s brethren, and to observe the rights of
one’s Tijani brothers and sisters by avoiding distressing them. Be for Allah and Allah will be for you, and do
not fear anyone’s blame when acting for the sake of Allah. We wish for you and ourselves for the hearts to
be mad with love for Allah, connected to His ma’rifah, secluded in His muraqabah and khidmah out of love
and thankfulness, in private and in public, and to be busy with Allah by rejecting everything other than Him.
Know that everything other than Him is “like a mirage in a lowland…” (Qur’an 24:39)—to the end of the
ayah [the full ayah is: “like a mirage in a lowland which a thirsty one thinks is water until, when he comes to
it, he finds it is nothing but finds Allah before him, and he will pay in full his due; and Allah is swift in
account”3]. It has been said: “Whoever tastes something of Allah’s pure love will be distracted by that from
anything other than Him.” I recommend you to have patience with that which afflicts you from the enemies
of the Hadrah. Allah (t.) said: “The end is with the muttaqun.” (Qur’an 7:128), “If you help Allah, He will
help you and make your feet firm.” (Qur’an 47:8) and: “If you show patience and taqwa, their plot will not
harm you in the least.” (Qur’an 3:120). Therefore, we must imitate in deen and Dunya and accompany both
at home and abroad such a one who never forgets to reject all other than Allah. It is incumbent upon us,
who claim to be upon the Tariq of the Qawm, even if we are not able to practice zuhd, to at least have zuhd
in what has not been decreed, since attachment to something not existent is a great burden. We ask Allah for
wisdom or for one of its branches, for He (j.m.q.4) said: “Whoever has been given wisdom has been given
great good.” (Qur’an 2:269) The way to that is to flee to Allah by fleeing to one of His doors, because He
said: “Come to houses through their doors.” (Qur’an 2:189), and that cannot be done properly except by
fleeing from the nafs, its caprice, its desires, Shaytan and his daughter, Dunya. It helps against the enemies to
hold onto Allah and to hold onto Allah’s rope, the Sunnah of our Prophet in both commands and
prohibitions, imitating his character and realizing his haqiqah, and to persevere in observing the prophetic
Tijani dhikrs morning and evening, nay at all times, purifying one’s sirr of other than the remembered
(j.w.a.). There is nothing better than seclusion, unless you are benefiting others or from others, as a murad or
a murid. Whoever accompanies a murad or a murid should suffice with the sincere one in the company of
haqiqah, because the company of he or she who is not attached to the Shaykh (r.a.a.) cuts off the murid and
hinders the murad. Indeed, the secret behind some religious and Tariqah gatherings is to pollinate the
murids. If even the slightest tarnishing from the nafs or caprice occurs without its perpetrator being rebuked
and brought back to the right, it will corrupt much of the gathering’s sirr, especially if it comes from one of
the distinguished people, for example, even if it were the amount of an atom. We have been endowed with
means as a concealment and to take one of the branches of wisdom. “Who is better in speech than one who
calls to Allah, acts rightly…?” (Qur’an 41:33)—to the end of the ayah [the full ayah: “Who is better in
speech than one who calls to Allah, acts rightly and says: “Indeed, I am of the Muslims?”]. “Indeed those
who say ‘Our Lord is Allah’ and then persevere upright” (Qur’an 41:30) It is necessary to rebuke the
beloved ones for every action that violates the laws of the masters of the French State and it is obligatory to
be in harmony with them, because they know the outward of the life of Dunya and they strive for concord,
the protection of life and the well being of the people of the country. As for the issue of the girl…—to the
end.5

[FOOTNOTES]
3. Saheeh International
4. Jalla min qāʼil
5. The published text of the letter seems to end here.

TITRE: Needs Title

To the visitors’ jama’ah, may Allah shade them all under the shade of His Throne on the day in which there
is no shade but His. Amin.
Al-Hamdu Lillah, Lord of the worlds, the Compassionate, the Merciful, the King of the Day of Judgment.
Only You we worship and only You we ask for help. As for what follows:
May a most brilliant salam and a most excellent greeting reach our loved ones wherever they may reside,
especially the people of Mauritania. Here there are some questions about your conditions and dua for you
that Allah may protect you, your children and your followers from the disliked things of Dunya and Akhirah,
and may He grant us and you the manners of the one whose character was praised by the Truth in His
saying: “You are indeed on a great character” (Qur’an 68:4). Nothing pleases me except to hear good from
you at all times and that the signs of your hals be in agreement with your words. “By time, indeed man is in
loss” (Qur’an 103:1-2) and it is not possible to escape this loss except through the following four things:
iman, righteous action, mutual advising to truth and mutual advising to patience. Indeed all those men – my
brother in Allah, my son, my ruh, my companion and my beloved –, whatever grieves them grieves me and
whatever pleases them pleases me. The first of them is al-Shaykhani, for all existence knows his standing in
my sight, before I take him as my representative and my substitute in delivering the amanah of the Shaykh
(r.a.a.), and there is no need to state this, just as he does not need it:

How can anything seem sound to people’s minds          if even the day requires evidence

Likewise al-Sayyid al-Hādī, Sayyidī Jawk, Muh̩ammad b. al-Nah̩w, Sayyidī Muh̩ammad b. al-Mishrī, the
Shaykh’s khalifahs in Jayjub, Shaykh Muh̩ammad ʽAbdullāh, in Tandagha Muh̩ammad b. al-T̩ulbah and in
Teganet the sons of Muh̩ammad Saydī, because whoever has taken from one of them with or without
intermediaries is as if he had taken directly from me and from the Shaykh (r.a.a.). So be brothers of purity,
do not envy each other, do not hate each other, do not turn away from each other. May Allah bring
harmony between the Shaykh’s (r.a.a.) beloved ones. He is the grantor of that and the one capable to do it.
Salam.

Ibrahim b. al-Hajj ‘Abd Allah al-Tijani, 1375 AH.

TITRE: Needs Title

Al-Hamdu Lillah, Lord of the worlds, the Compassionate, the Merciful, King of the Day of Judgment. May
salah and peace be with the Opener and Sealer, Truth’s Helper through the Truth, our sayyid Muhammad,
the best of the messengers, and with his family and companions, the protectors of the Muhammadan
Shari’ah in all places and times. May Allah be pleased with our sayyid and example, possessor of the firm
maqam, the sincere and helpful guide.
This is beneficial advice and some comprehensive and lordly instructions for sayyid Fulān b. Fulān and all
the brothers, wherever they may be. As-Salamu ʽalaykum wa Rahmatullahi taʽālā wa Barakatuh. I advise you
to and stress the importance of holding fast onto this Muhammadan deen, which consists of Islam, Iman
and Ihsan, and to this Ahmadi and Tijani Tariqah, by believing that Allah is one, without partner. He is the
One [wāh̩id], the Single [ah̩ad], the Eternal [s̩amad], He has not begotten nor was begotten and there is
nothing like unto Him. He is the First and the Last, the Apparent and the Hidden, and He knows all things.
You should also believe that Muhammad is His servant and messenger, the Seal of the prophets, the sayyid
servant, Allah’s light, madad and existence [wujūd], who is characterized by Allah’s attributes as a provision
and support [imdād] from Allah Most High through His pure generosity and love for him from before
creation, out of Allah’s favour and magnificence. Believing in him ‫ صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬entails believing in all
prophets and messengers – may salah and peace be with them – and in whatever they brought.
It is not to be denied of Allah             that He can gather the world into one
Furthermore, you should believe that the Shaykh, Ahmad Tijani – may Allah be pleased with him – is the
inheritor of Allah’s Messenger, his khalifah, his madad whose secret [sirr] travels unseen6 to all existents in
the visible and invisible worlds from pre-eternity to post-eternity, who is characterized by those qualities
inherited as help [imdād] from the Prophet ‫ صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬for him out of grace from his presence ‫صلى هللا‬
‫ عليه وسلم‬and from the presence of the Giver and Benefactor: “That is the Bounty of God, which He gives to
whomsoever He will, and God is Possessed of Tremendous Bounty.” (Quran 57:21)7 He is the synthesis of
the awliya’ and their sea, such that no wali drinks or gives to drink except from his sea. This is stated in an
explicit passage dictated to him by the Sayyid of Existence ‫صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬. Witnessing and practicing
muraqabah of these three haqa’iq is the door to ma’rifah, which is the major wilayah [al-wilāyah al-kubrā].
The latter does not lift any obligation related to the deen or to the tariqah, nor does it make anything
forbidden licit or the opposite. Its fruit will only appear after the encounter with Allah on the Last Day:
“and you will indeed be paid your reward in full on the Day of Resurrection.” (Quran 3:185)8 This faith
[īmān] has no connection with the world of bodies [ʽālam al-ajsām], but rather its place is the heart, even
though the heart is a piece of flesh that, if it is right, the whole body is right, and if it is corrupt, the whole

body is corrupt. The wali never brings a new ruling, but rather he brings a new understanding, as indicated
by “or an understanding given to a Muslim man [rajul9].” Shaykh Tijānī (r.a.a.) is the Shaykh of the tariqahs
before him and there is no tariqah after him, and he will be the Shaykh of his tariqah to the end of time. The
one who imparts [al-mulaqqin] the wird should see that the Shaykh imparts the wird through him, so that
the one receiving the wird stands as a murid of the Shaykh, not as a murid of the one imparting the wird,
and he receives tarbiyah through the muqaddam. The murabbi is Shaykh Tijānī (r.a.a.), and the murid is free
and should visit all the Shaykh’s beloved ones and khalifahs, benefit from them and benefit them. The
people of the tariqah are brothers and the Shaykh is one (r.a.a.). The sirr of tarbiyah among us is the
guarantee of the Messenger of Allah
‫صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬, which is conditioned upon the observance of the wirds and the wazifah. The murid can
choose to see the muqaddam as the Shaykh (r.a.a.), in honour of the Shaykh, especially the khalifahs and
especially the Shaykh’s descendants, since they are him and he is them and everyone is him (r.a.a.) and they
are everyone. Should the murid be dazzled at the beginning of his vigilance [intibāh] and neglect his wird or
his wazifah out of intoxication and immersion in the Shaykh’s sea, he is excused. Such a state should pass
quickly for, should it last, it would be a sign of deception and of the ruh’s having been cut off [jazm rūh̩].
         Do not follow one whose sharīʽah has vanished                 even if he should come with news from Allah
Whoever holds onto what we have pointed to will be, in sha Allah, on the straight path, while those who
turn away, Allah shall turn away their hearts. We seek refuge in Allah from deviation and apostasy. The
straight path is pure milk between the dregs of apostasy and the blood of deviation. Allah leads to the right
aim.
O Allah, I ask You by Yourself, by the Seal of Your prophets and by the Seal of Your awliya’ complete
maʽrifah of Yourself, of the Seal of Your prophets and of the Seal of Your awliya’. Protect us from all slips,
so that we may die with pure Iman based on real and certain vision [ash-shuhūdī al-ʽayānī l-yaqīnī] and be
resurrected with it among the group of the Seal, Shaykh Tijani (r.a.a.), in his neighbourhood with his
ancestor in the highest of ʽIlliyyūn. Allahumma s̩alli ʽalā sayyidi-nā Muh̩ammadini l-fātih̩i li-mā ughliqa
wal-khātimi li-mā sabaqa nās̩iri l-h̩aqqa bil-h̩aqqi wal-hādī ilā s̩irāt̩i-ka l-mustaqīmi wa-ʽalā āli-hi h̩aqqa
qadri-hi wa-miqdāri-hi l-ʽaz̩īm.

This was written by the servant of the Ibrahimi hadrah, ʽAli Cisse b. al-Hasan with the permission of our
sayyid and refuge, the Qutb of guidance, the spring of the spiritual flow [fayd̩] and succour [imdād], our
patron, al-Hajj Ibrahim – may Allah benefit us through him and through his knowledge and secrets and let
us die loyal to his covenant and in his love.
Last days of Dhu l-Hijjah 1369 AH in the city of Kaolack.

9
 I preferred to maintain the translation literal here, giving for “rajul” its primary meaning of “man”, as opposed to woman.
However, it is important to know that “rajul” is sometimes used to denote “true men”, those distinguished for their
character, virtue and piety. In this sense, pious women and female walīs would be intended too, the point of the matter
being virtue rather than gender. TT.

[FOOTNOTES]
6. as-sārī: this active participle’s primary meaning would be “traveling by night”. While it could be translated simply as “traveling” or “reaching”, I see in the nightly denotation of the word a possible hint to the fact that the Hidden Qutb’s madad reaches all while none, or very few, are aware of it, and will only be manifested on the Day of Judgement, hence the addition of “unseen” in the translation. TT.
7. Seyyed Hossein Nasr et al., a c. di, The Study Quran: A New Translation and Commentary (Toronto, Canada; Sydney, Australia: HarperCollins Publishers, 2015) (epub version).
8. Ibid.

TITRE: Needs Title

Al-h̩amdu li-Llāh, and may the two salāms be with the last prophet.
         Kaolack, 13 Safar 1361 AH. This is the advice of a father to his son, the dutiful Muhammad
al-Amīn, which was mentioned by the Shaykh – may Allah protect him and take care of him.
         My brother and son of my rūh̩, the sayyid al-Amīn ibn Shaykh Muhammad al-Jakanī al-Tijānī, after
being told to have taqwā, was advised to practice murāqabah of Allah – exalted is He – with every breath, to
keep his limbs busy with what pleases Allah – exalted is He –, without hindering him from keeping his
heart absorbed by Allah’s – exalted is He – glory or in the love of Allah’s Messenger ‫صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬.
Abundance of dhikr, s̩alāh for him ‫ صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬with S̩alātu l-Fātih̩i and praising him bring about this
love. The most beneficial thing for you is what I have said, because the source is one, even if what others
have said may be higher and more valuable. The same goes for witnessing that Allah is the one being
benevolent to you and for being constantly grateful for that to which He has guided you.

         Benefit is surely always present. If it appears // that is enough, otherwise it is simply hidden, concealed.10

         It is not hidden from you that what matters to us is the above, not karāmahs or al-kashf al-z̩ulmānī,
so what we care about is al-kashf al-nūrānī, which is the objective of this group. Al-kashf al-nūrānī is the one
about Allah’s Names, Attributes, Speech and Allah’s Messenger’s ‫ صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬speech. The one who sees
or is made to see is not higher than the one who does not see or is not made to see,11 so do not be deceived
by the abundant flood on the tongues of some majdhūbs from our t̩arīqah or others whom you may have
met or read their words, because most of it is superfluous or secondary, but not better. Somebody on whom
fanāʼ in Allah’s Dhāt and S̩ifah has passed, who stood in order to carry out the obligations, avoid what is
prohibited, love the people of Allah – who are Allah’s door and the greatest of whom is the Messenger of

Allah ‫ صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬–, shall be the ʽārif who sips from the seas of maʽrifah and whose tongue is
nonetheless always out because of thirst.12 It is necessary to uphold good character with every creature, treat
people according to their stations, always learn and teach, and always remain connected to us, throughout
one’s life, because s̩uh̩bah13 should be for the sake of Allah and the saved ones among us should take their
brothers and sisters by the hand. You must direct and guide those who follow you as a deputy of the Shaykh
– may Allah be pleased with him –, even though the tarbiyah comes actually from his hands, and you must
strive earnestly to acquire the halal, as it has been commanded. Be agreeable with people in that which is not
harmful in the end and treat amiably and flatter the masters of the state, as it is said:

        Flatter them as long as you are in their home // and please them as long as you are in their land

        I ask Allah – exalted is He – to take you by the hand, to benefit you and to benefit all your students
and your students’ students, to the end of time. You are in our presence in the eye of pleasure and
acceptance.14 I have given you permission to return to your family in all good.

        Had we been given the choice, we would have never been in need // but there is no choice with time
        I do not lose hope that Allah shall put our affairs in order // so that our meeting will cure even the burning thirst

        May you continue as you desire, wa-al-salām.

        Ibrāhīm ibn al-H̩ājj ‘Abd Allah al-Tijānī, Kaolack. May Allah treat him kindly. Amin.
        Son of my rūh̩, ‘Alī Cisse, give a copy of this letter to al-Jakanī and keep one for yourself.

[FOOTNOTES]
10. I understand this to be in reference to “that to which Allah has guided you”, i.e.: it is always beneficial, either openly or in some concealed manner. Where I said: “hidden, concealed”, the Arabic has a grammatical pun, as the same words also mean “an implied pronoun”.
11. I think this refers to having supernatural visions.
12. Due to the infinity of Allah and of the knowledge of Him.
13. Companionship
14. An idiomatic expression meaning that the Shaykh is pleased with the student.

TITRE: Needs Title

Counsel # 22

In the Name of Allah. Salutations upon Sayyiduna Muhammad al-Fatih, al-Khatim. To Umar Low, who composed the letter via our servant Ahmad Thiam that informs all the servants by his tongue or through his tongue and pen together, may Allah reward him on our behalf. Peace.

May Allah elevate the author.

After mentioning the Name of Allah, and may Allah send salutation upon Sayyiduna Muhammad and upon his family as per their true value and upon his tremendous worth, all praise is due to Allah who caused the illumination of His guidance to shine in the heavens of the hearts of His sincere ones and purified their hearts by way of their focus on Him, obedience to Him, love of Him, service to Him, and avoidance of His prohibitions and adherence to His commands. [All praise is due to He who] irradiated the territory of the souls by adherence to the way of the purest of His creation and following the traces of the mirror of His Essence, the sight of the appearance (math-har) of His Attributes, and thereby enraptured them from recognition of their own individual self-identity by His Identity (huwiyya).

May Allah’s Mercy and Peace be upon the Greatest Means (Al-Waseela al-Uthma) and The Purest Well of Knowledges (s.a.a.w.s). May Allah be satisfied with our Means, the Seal-al-Tijani (Waseelatuna al-Khatm al-Tijani) and upon his genuine secret.

As for what follows—

To all the beloved ones and brothers wherever they are in the regions and areas of the country, after having sent the greeting and well-wishing of Peace, and Allah’s Mercy, be He exalted, and His Blessings upon you:

I ask Allah, be He exalted, for happiness in both realms and to be enabled to be busy with beneficial things in both, as well. Then I advise you and myself, O Assembly of the Beloved Ones, to make the ablution with pure water, to perform the five daily salahs, and to perform all the obligatory awrad of the path. Allah, be He exalted, has said: {Maintain the five daily salahs by performing them at their appointed times and the middle salah} (2:238)15 To maintain the salah as an act of obedience to the command of Allah, be He exalted, is an obligation. This obligation is only carried out with pure water for the one who fails to be excused from its use (note: and must therefore make tayammum, a method of purifying oneself using soil, whereby the one who performs it wipes over their face and hands with the accompanying intention required to do so.) One must maintain the salah and be diligent therein, observing its conditions and etiquettes. Allah, be He exalted has said: {And who preserve their salahs by observing them in their appointed times.} (70:2) The salahs are the first of the slave’s acts to be examined (on the Day of Judgement) and are the most excellent means by which to gain Allah’s proximity.

15
  However I think it's best to leave the translation of (‫ ) الصالة الوسطى‬as the 'middle prayer' or the 'middle most prayer' without indicating that it is the 'ASR prayer' since in the letter Sheikh Ibrahim did not give that indication. There is a difference of opinion among the Ulama of Hadīth, the Fuqaha, the Mufassirūn ...etc. Even the Sahabah were in disagreement with regard to that according to the 'Riwayat'. Some said that it was Dhuhur, others said 'Asr', and there are those who said it was the 'Fajr' prayer. Each group has advanced their arguments and 'Dalil'.

But some Ārifeen and people of 'kashf' believe that it is the 'Jumua' Prayer, the Friday congregational prayer according to our Sheikh and a Khalifa of Sheikh Tijani Sayyiduna Sheikh Ahmed Sukairij.
If you look at it, all the prayers are equally important and all compulsory, so why is an emphasis put on one of them without the other four? A good question isn't it?
Furthermore, Jumua prayer is also important and compulsory, but it only comes once a week and some people may be busy or make themselves busy and miss it... and they can pray Dhuhur instead in order to compensate for it and complete the five obligatory prayers.

He said, (s.a.a.w.s), ‘Whoever performs the ablution for the salah well and then proceeds to the scheduled salah and then prays with people or in congregation in the masjid will have his sins forgiven by Allah, the Strong, the Majestic.’ Whosoever preserves the previously mentioned purity joins it to Actual Purity, which perseveres and never expires, that is from the firmest forms of purity from blameworthy character, in both legal and Real terms, like envy, grandeur, ostentation, and all else that is displeasing of the actions of the heart.

Al-Alaamah Sidi Abd al-Rahmaan al-Akhdhary said in his summary on the rules of the salah: whoever purposely performs the salah without ablution is a disbeliever. We seek refuge in Allah from that. Ritual purification is a condition of the salah and is an obligation sanctioned by Allah in His Book and by the tongue of the Prophet (s.a.a.w.s), upon whom be Mercy and Peace, as well as the Consensus of the People of the Qibla on that issue. Thus, whoever deliberately performs the salah without ablution has made that which is prohibited permissible. It is well known that whoever makes the prohibited permissible is a disbeliever according to legal unanimity. May Allah provide a refuge for us from that. You must observe the salah in congregation, and its observance and performance is to be in the Preferred Time (Ikhtiyaari) (Note: the Maliki school has two times for the salahs: preferred (ikhtiyaari) and necessary (dharoori), respectively. The Preferred Time is the time in which all must perform the salah, unless one has a valid excuse for its delay in this time. A person may pray whenever they like within this time. Thus, one may pray in its beginning or in its end. To delay to the end of the Preferred Time is not sinful. One is not permitted to postpone their prayer beyond the Preferred Time without a valid excuse. If one does so, he has entered the Necessary Time. Therein, one may not delay her prayer unless there is a valid excuse. If she delays the salah in the Necessary Time she incurs sin. One cannot choose to pray in the beginning or the end of the Necessary Time but must perform the prayer as soon as the reason which caused her to enter the Necessary Time is removed.)

The Tradition states: ‘The beginning of the salah time is Allah’s Contentment, its middle is His Mercy, and its ending is His Pardon.’ Salah in congregation is a sunnah (Note: A non-obligatory act that the Prophet (s.a.a.w.s) persisted in is termed a “sunnah” in the School of Malik.) while safeguarding it is a condition of our Tijani Path, provided the imam of the congregation can fulfill the requirements of the ruku (genuflection) and the sujood (prostration) properly. If the imam of the congregation one would pray with is able to perform these acts properly, one observes the sunnah of praying in congregation with him. If he is not able to do so then one is not obliged to pray with the said congregation.

Seek aid in the establishment of the acts of worship through eating that which is permissible. Some of the Fuqaraa (Note: Literally, “The Poor” but means those who realize their complete dependence on Allah, i.e., the Sufis) have said: ‘Eat what you like but beware for you will act in accordance with the nature of what you ate. Take the companionship of whom you like but be aware that you will take his religious practice for your own as well.’ In the Tradition, it says: ‘Allah has an angel employed at Bait ul Maqdis (Jerusalem) that calls out every night saying, ‘Allah does not accept the ‘sarf ’ nor the ‘adl’ of he who eats the impermissible.’ (Note: There seems to be a typo here as it says the “Sidq refers to the involuntary act…” but it most likely was meant to say ‘sarf’ as mentioned before. With that in mind …) The ‘sarf ’ is the voluntary act while the ‘adl’ refers to the obligation. He said, (s.a.a.w.s), ‘the most beloved act with Allah is the Salah in its time,’ meaning in its first time (i.e., the Preferred Time). From the counsel of Maulaana Umar al-Farooq, (r.a.a.) we have: ‘As far as I am concerned, the most important issue is the salah. Whoever protects it and maintains it has safeguarded all other acts of worship. Whoever fails to do so has lost all other acts of worship.’ Shaikh Muhyi al-Deen (Ibn Arabi) (r.a.a.) said, ‘No act of worship attaches one to the stations of Those-Drawn-Close, be they angel or messenger, prophet, wali, or believer, but the salah. Allah, be He exalted, said: {prostrate and draw close} (96:19) You must protect your awrad and their regulated well-known etiquettes. It has been made a condition at the time of taking the Path that one is to not be indifferent to performing the Wird. So, he doesn’t delay it past its time unless there is a valid excuse.

The Seal-Shaikh al-Tijani said: ‘Whoever takes the Wird and then completely abandons it or is indifferent towards its performance is subject to punitive measures and will be afflicted with disaster.’ So, performing the Wird and doing it in its time is an obligation on par with fulfilling one’s oath. He said, be He exalted, {Let them fulfill their vows} (22:29). The virtues of this path, its lights, secrets, and knowledge, are all restricted to the recitation of the Obligatory Awrad in the morning and evening, as well as the Wadhifa in the Zawiya with the brothers and the Friday Thikr.

From the words of the Seal-Shaikh al-Tijani (r.a.a.) are his saying: ‘What you have heard regarding the specialties particular to the Wird will come to pass, without doubt. Nonetheless, beware of negligence of the Wird, even if only one time ever.’ The condition of the validity of the Wird is maintenance of the Salah, in congregation, as well as the affairs of the Sacred Law. You are to perform the Wadhifa in the Zawiya. A condition for its performance is that it be done in congregation. To do it alone does not suffice this condition (Note: If there are others available to join you). It is for this reason that we find the Seniors of the Path pay specific attention to the Wadhifa and are concerned about it. They aspire to its performance in congregation due to the good inside it for this world and the next.

 Also from the words of the Seal-Shaikh al-Tijani are (r.a.a.): ‘If you knew what virtue was contained in the Wadhifa you would come to it crawling.’ The Wadhifa compensates for all the sins one commits in his day and acquires the Elite Intercession from the Prophet (s.a.a.s.) in all the sins he stockpiled that would normally deserve a great punishment in recompense, both outwardly and inwardly. The Shaikh stressed this point saying: ‘This compensation is a promise from the Mustafawi Presence, may the purest of Mercies and Peace be upon him. So, let the Tijani murid with concern for himself beware of frequent carelessness regarding the performance of the Wadhifa for there are tajaliyyat and substantial spiritual experiences contained in it for those who are routine with its performance. If its mere ability to infect those who attend it with what the Seniors (Akaabir) have were its only virtue it would suffice as a reason to attend it. These are a Folk whose company is never regretted. Attending the gathering of the Wadhifa causes the murid to harvest the fruits of every precious spiritual meaning. The Prophet (s.a.a.w.s) loves its attendees with a special love outside of the love that is already well known for them if they maintain the conditions of the path along with the beloveds. The Wadhifa does not remove the necessity to perform the daily obligatory Wird after Subh and after Asr nor does that Wird make the Wadhifa redundant.

From the graces upon the people of the Tijani Tariqa, and what they have of eternal happiness, granted to them by the guarantee of the Chosen Mustafic Presence, and their being from the People of the Providential Circle, (Ahl al-Daaira al-Fadhliyya) is what our Seal-Shaikh al-Tijani said (r.a.a.). He said, may Allah be pleased with him, and make him content and ourselves with Him, Aameen: ‘The Master of Existence (s.a.a.w.s) said to me, while awake and not whilst sleeping, ‘You are from those who are safe. All who saw you are safe provided they die on faith.’ He also said: I requested from him (s.a.a.w.s) that all who take the Wird will have all their sins forgiven from before taking it and after having done so, that shortcomings regarding their obligations be covered via Allah’s grace upon them and not as a result of their good deeds, that they not be taken to account for anything, that they be saved from Allah’s punishment from the time of death until entering Paradise, that they enter Paradise without judgment nor punishment amongst the first of the first group to enter it, and that they would be with me in Illiyeen in the neighborhood of the Prophet (s.a.a.w.s). He then said to me (s.a.a.w.s): ‘I guarantee all of that to you with a guarantee that will remain unbroken until you all are neighboring me in Illiyeen.’ He said (r.a.a.): ‘I asked him for Allah, Strong and Majestic, to save me and all of their examinations and argument and His questioning them about things be they small or great on the Day of Qiyama. That Allah provide shade for me and all of them in the shade of the Throne on the Day of Qiyama. That He pass me and them over the Bridge faster than the blinking of an eye. That He quench my and their thirst from his Basin (s.a.a.w.s).’ He said (r.a.a): ‘So, he responded to me (s.a.a.w.s) with his noble statement: ‘I have guaranteed everything listed in this book for you with a guarantee that will never change for you or them until you and all those that you have mentioned are my neighbors in Illyeen. I have also guaranteed everything you have requested from me with that which no future agreement can break.’

Beware and then beware again regarding the rights of parents, having bad manners toward them and doing anything that may bother them. He said (s.a.a.w.s): ‘Paradise encounters its fragrance from 500 years away. One who is irreverent toward his parents doesn’t encounter its fragrance at all nor does he who cuts off family ties.’

The Seal-Shaikh al-Tijani said (r.a.a.): ‘Spiritual travel in this path will not be made easy for whoever fails to show devotion toward his parents.’ You must indulge all that makes them happy outside of polytheism. He said (t.a.) {But if they endeavor to make you associate with Me that of which you have no knowledge, do not obey them…} (31:14) A Tijani murid must try and show devotion to his parents as much as possible for their obedience is a means of the murid’s success in the Path of The Will (Tariqa al-Irada). He said (s.a.a.w.s): ‘Paradise is beneath the feet of the mothers.’ Do not curse your parents. In the tradition, it states: ‘Allah curses the one who curses his parents.’

Bearing all of this in mind, it is obligatory for the murid to go to the Complete Shaikh of the Time (Kamil al-‘Asr), to take from him and to learn etiquette from him, and to confirm the Ahmadi-Ibrahimi treaties, even if he were to go against his parents to do so. It has been related that Al-Sari al-Saqati commanded al-Junayd to do something and his father did so as well at the same time. Al-Sari preferred what his shaikh commanded him to fulfill over that of his father saying, ‘I didn’t see any benefit except in what my shaikh commanded me to do.’ This is because the shaikh is the spiritual father. He raises the murid and causes him to ascend to his Source and says, ‘This is yourself and this is your Lord.’ For this reason, the right of the shaikh is greater than that of the father.

Abandon injustice and usurpation as is found in extortion, transgression, betrayal, trickery, thievery, and piracy. Avoid taking all prohibited things, great or minor, open or hidden, as a given norm. The most prominent example of this in our time is usury. The Prophet (s.a.a.w.s) said: May Allah curse the receiver and the payer of interest, the one who records it and the two witnesses to the transaction. Sell gold in exchange for equivalent gold, sell silver in exchange for equivalent silver, sell wheat in exchange for equivalent wheat, sell barley in exchange for equivalent barley, sell dates in exchange for equivalent dates, sell salt in exchange for equivalent salt. Sell like for like, equal for equal, and hand-to-hand. If a person transacts in excess, it will be usury (riba). The taker and the giver are alike in guilt in a usurious exchange. If the commodities differ, then you may sell as you wish.’ –The Tradition.

You must show deference regarding the rights of the brothers. Avoid harming them, overlooking their rights, and manipulating their thoughts/feelings (taghyeer khawaatirihim). By Allah, that is deeply penetrating poison, and open destruction. May Allah provide refuge for us from that. He said (s.a.a.w.s), ‘The Muslim is he whose hand and tongue are of no threat to the Muslims’… ‘The blood, and honor, and the wealth of the Muslim are sacred to all Muslims’…’Guard yourself from oppression, for oppression will be darkness on the Day of Qiyama.’

The Seal-Shaikh al-Tijani said (r.a.a,) in some of his counsels: ‘Beware and then beware again that one should neglect his brother’s rights, be it regarding retrieving some benefit or fending off some harm, or assistance regarding some distress, for if he is tried via overlooking a right of the brothers he is being tried regarding an oversight of the Divine Right.’

From the words of the Prophet (s.a.a.w.s) to the Seal-Shaikh al-Tijani (r.a.a.) are his saying: ‘Tell your companions not to harm one another for what harms them harms me.’ He is reported to have said, (r.a.a.) ‘Offending people of this Path is offending him.’ He said (t.a.): {Indeed, those who abuse Allah and His Messenger—Allah cursed them in this world and the Hereafter and prepared them a humiliating punishment.} (33:57)

You must maintain the ties of kinship. Refrain from investigating the situations of the brothers. Avoid their disputes and all that causes malice to enter their hearts. Observe their right to dignity and do not put them off. Respect of everyone connected to the Shaikh and the Elite Seniors is even more important.

Flee from the world and its people to Allah (t.a.) just as you would run from a lion, or more intensely still, because the world—as it comes in the Tradition—is the home of the homeless and the wealth of the impoverished. The moron is the one who gathers these two aspects together. This is why it is said to the Arif, ‘Regulate yourself with the tears of regret if you observe anything but that Jamal and limit your view to only see the perfection of The Great-Glorious.’

Abu al-Abbas would say: ‘The Arif has no worldly life. His worldly life is the Hereafter. His Hereafter belongs to His Lord.’ The Traditions narrate its blameworthiness and the need to flee from it. He said (s.a.a.w.s): ‘The world is cursed and that which is in it is cursed excluding the remembrance of Allah and what is related to it, or a teacher and a student.’ You must observe asceticism regarding the world. The reality of asceticism is to abstain from all that is not Allah (t.a.). Allah revealed to Isa (a.s.): ‘When I observe the heart of a slave and I find it devoid of the love of the World and the Hereafter, I fill it with My love.’ With this it becomes clear to you that seeking the Rijal (Men of Allah) is something from outside this world and the hereafter. Beware of worldly people for they are the foremost in it, drowned in the love of it, and spend all of their time in it while being completely oblivious of Allah and His remembrance for it has taken over their entire being from anything other than itself.’

Distancing from worldly people is from the concerns of the murid for their companionship is a well-known poison. He said (t.a.): {Do not obey one whose heart We have made heedless of Our remembrance.} Beware and beware again of divorce for most people are ignorant regarding it and few are those who divorce their wives without having rebelled or forsaken his faith in the process. The temporary marriage is prohibited according to the Jurists and is disbelief as per our Shaikh, the Seal al–Tijani (r.a.t.a.). It is prohibited, as the Jurists have said, because it leads to the amassing of major sins. In this regard, the Tradition states: ‘The most despised of the permissible acts with Allah is divorce.’

The Prophet (s.a.a.w.s) forbade swearing by divorce (Note: This is as in the husband saying to his wife, ‘If you leave this room, by Allah, you are divorced.’) He said (s.a.a.w.s): ‘Do not swear by divorce nor emancipation of a slave for these are the oaths of the immoral.’

You must be excessive and compete in your love for Maulana Rasulillah (s.a.a.w.s) and in your love for Maulana Shaikh Ahmad al-Tijani (r.a.) and of his appearances and of all the People of Allah. The disparity between the stations of the Rijal is because of the disparity in love. The love of Allah (t.a.) and His Messenger is the spirit of Islam. Some have said: ‘The best means of worship for the worshippers is endearing one’s self with the Awliya (t.a.) through what they themselves love. The sign of Allah’s love for someone is the love of the awliyā for him. He said (s.a.a.w.s): ‘None of you believes until I am more beloved to him than his family, his father, and all people.’ His love (s.a.a.w.s) raises the man to the love of Allah and of meeting Him. He said (s.a.a.w.s): ‘Whoever loves to meet Allah, Allah loves to meet him. Whoever doesn’t love to meet Allah, Allah does not love to meet him. As love increases, the murid’s safety from disconnection from Allah, the obstacles of the path, and the retribution of distractions and whims increases.

The Seal-Shaikh al-Tijani said addressing all the beloveds: ‘Rejoice! Whoever loves us until death is raised amongst those who are safe, regardless of their state at the time of death—provided they don't adorn themselves with a safety suit made from the fabric of Allah’s scheming against them (Note: meaning as long as they don’t rest on this promise and not attempt to obey Allah at all thinking that somehow, they have found a loophole).

You must show reverence for both the living and dead awliyā because they are Allah’s honored slaves. Beware of belittling their value and importance for that kind of activity is the means of expulsion in our Path; we seek refuge in Allah (t.a.) from that. You must go to them, sit with them, commune with them, and visit them for Allah, by Allah, and in Allah. They are the means between Allah and His creation. In truth, visiting them is communication with the Prophet (s.a.a.w.s). Seeking their petition (tawassul) is to do so with the Messenger (s.a.a.w.s). This is because every goodness of blessing, small or large, is attained through him. They appear with his appearance. Every wali and those who know Allah are from his differentiations and various appearances (s.a.a.w.s). He said (s.a.a.w.s): ‘No man visits another man for Allah’s sake, desiring Him in the process, wishing to meet Him, except that an angel from behind him calls out to him saying: ‘You have done well, your promenade has been pleasant, and Paradise has been made lovely for you.’

Abdullah ibn Samit (r.a.a.) narrated that the Messenger (s.a.a.w.s) said: ‘Allah, the Strong, the Majestic said: ‘My love is a right for those who love each other for My sake, who exchange gifts for My sake, who give charity for My sake, and who sit together for My sake.’ So, a murid must focus on his shaikh, connecting his heart with his, realizing that the flow of divine grace only comes via his means, even though all the awliyā are guides and are themselves guided. They have said that the Shaikh amidst a people is like the prophet in his community. So, connecting the heart with the Shaikh is a great foundation in uprightness and the Powerful Reliance. You must have many sittings with the Awliya. One of the Saaliheen saw Sayyidna Muhammad (s.a.a.w.s) while dreaming and asked him what the best of actions is? He responded, upon him be Allah’s mercy and peace, your being in the presence of a wali as long as it takes to milk a sheep or a she-camel. He said: ‘I said: Does the wali have to be alive or dead? He said (s.a.a.w.s): ‘Live or dead.’

The ziyara of the Lords of Taqwa-is a salve that cures, / is the key to the doors of guidance and goodness,

incites desire in a void chest, / expands the breast that has narrowed through extensive burden,

assists the oppressed one, / strengthens a feeble person,

gives to those who lack, / and mends one who has a fracture.

How many a one who has been killed by the depths of sin / has ziyara saved, to then cast him into the ocean of repentance and piety?

How many a murid did it give victory to / through an expert guide who knows the nature of trials, and what cures?

He casts a Yemeni cloth over him / that is embellished with the Opening, prosperity, and help.

The Sufi’s disclose the secret of ziyara openly / and have advised others to do so, privately and publically, Oh Companion!

So, make ziyara and have adab after correcting your intention / in the way a slave would have adab with a free king.

There is no difference in this edict between the Guiding Salik, Majdhub, the live and dead / the Ascetic, or the Worshippers, for it applies to all of them /- although the sun is not like the full-moon.

The murid’s failure to perform ziyara is usually a decisive proof of his being cut off, lack of sincerity, lack of increase in Allah, hope in other than Allah, and his worship of the ego and its inclinations. There is an increase of love in the ziyara but the increase is in proportion to the extent of his love and interaction with the Shaikh. Thus, the true murid refers to his shaikh’s presence for increase and reinforcement via the Overflow (al-Fayd) proportionate with the ziyara, for the acquisition from its lights, harvest of its fruits, reception of the knowledge, manifestations, secrets, and benefits that appear from it. This way he profits from the results of the Presence, as a true murid in the path of the will. Know that the murid does not ascend with any other means of proximity like the ziyara. Good—that is, all good—is in the ziyara and deprivation lies in indifference towards it for it is a sign of one’s halting on the spiritual journey.

The Divine Voice calls to him constantly and says to him: {Say: My Lord increase me in knowledge.} (20:114) Knowledge concerning Allah’s Essence has no end nor zenith. He said (s.a.a.w.s): ‘Allah has Rijal such that whoever looks at them is given a happiness that has no miserableness after it, ever.’ In the book, ‘The Ahmadaic Benefit for the One Who Wants Eternal Happiness,’ there is an anecdote related from our Shaikh, the Seal al Tijani (r.a.a) that states: ‘What is with the man who lives in his shaikh’s region and three days pass without him having visited him? What is with this man who claims, astonishingly, murid-ship while having this huge deficiency.’ Furthermore, I ask Allah (t.b.w.t.a) petitioning all the matters of Allah, by His secret, and by the presence of our Shaikh, our reinforcement, to take us by our hands, and to enable us to have an elite positioning in front of Him, to make us from the appearances of His contentment, and that of His secret from pre-pre-pre-eternity to post-post-post eternity, and to cause us, and all our brothers, to benefit a special benefit, flourishing forever and eternally, by virtue of the Seal-Shaikh al-Tijani and by his secret, until our having settled in the highest level of Illiyeen in the neighborhood of the Master of the Messengers (s.a.a.w.s). Peace.

From the dictations of our Shaikh to al-Hajj Sidi Ali Cisse. He wrote at the end of it, ‘Sidi Ali Cisse wrote with my permission’ in his own handwriting. All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the Worlds.

TITRE: Needs Title

Section: 23rd Letter from the Advices:

In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful. All praise belongs to Allah alone, and may
peace and salutations be upon the one who there is no prophet after him. To proceed:

Thus, this is an encompassing advice with beneficial wisdoms/rulings that the truthful seeker, the
outstanding lover, the one who has praised God till old age, who sits on the peak of grandeur, the Quran
explainer, Muhammad Shaq Baknātun asked me... And as such, I wanted to answer his question with Allah's
swt blessings, deriving support from the sea of our Sheikh, in spite of the fact that I'm not worthy of it and
I'm not of those with perfect speech.

Hence I advise myself and you all to God-consciousness, secretly and openly, and to be aware of His s.w.t.
observance of your every state (Muraaqabatihi) far or near, and to go towards Allah during some hours in
the night and some hours in the morning, and to be busy with Him in such a way that preoccupies you from
all other than Him. Travelling (to Him) is in obeying Him, and serving Him in all states, and hold on to the
company of those who awaken your spiritual states (Ahwal) and guide you to Allah, to His speech, and to
following the Prophet ﷺ and His manifestations in words and actions. And they say that "following"
makes the follower as though they are a part of the one followed... even if the follower is a non-Arab. And
whoever the door of following is granted (futiha lahu), then that is a proof of Allah's (s.w.t.) Love. Allah said:
"Say: If indeed you love Allah, then follow me, and consequently, Allah will love you" (Suratul Imran vs. 31).
And beware of heedlessness regarding Allah s.w.t., as it is the source (Ra's) of every sin.

And it is narrated that there is no hunted animal killed or tree that is cut off except as a result of its
heedlessness of Allah's remembrance, because a thief cannot steal from a house whose owner is awake... only
when the inhabitants are in the heedless state of sleep. And you must remove all worries from creation as
that is the trait of the people who establish the Divine Reality (Ahlu Tahqeeq). And I admonish you to
ensure that you are steadfast in your prayers in congregation and that you are steadfast in attending the
gatherings of wadhifa with the companions (of the tariqa), and to be consistent in commanding the beloved
(mureeds) with you to act on all commandments and to abstain from all prohibitions openly and secretly,
and to show eagerness and care to all that draws them closer to Allah swt, and to show eagerness and care
to all that earns them the Sheikh's pleasure. And strive in carrying out his orders and in serving him and in
following him and emulating him... and this is the sign of love... as the lover obeys the one he loves. And you
should be connected with him by visiting him and sitting with him and in striving to please him.

And it was said to the messenger of Allah ﷺ, "Which worship is the best?" And he replied: "Sitting in the
presence of a Wali for the duration of milking a sheep." And I ask Allah swt, seeking Him by His Secret and
the secret of His Secret, to bless us and you with the floodplains of the Tijani seal and to always rain upon
us with the clouds of His blessings forever... till the Day of Judgement. Wa Salaam

From the last 4 days of Dhul Qa'dah 1308 AH

TITRE: Encouraging Brothers and Sisters to Repair the Relationships Between Them

Al-Hamdu Lillah. As-Salamu alaikum wa Rahmatullahi (t.) wa Barakatuh.
This is addressed to our beloveds and our brothers and sisters who reside in Banjul—whether they be male
or female, young or old—and I want to mention specifically my earthly son and my constant servant who
takes up the affairs of the Muslims, Sayyidi Ibrahim Jagne (may Allah preserve him, Amin). Likewise my
generous host Dawud Jak, my beloved of old Abdullah Ngaye, al-Hussein Tur, Kabiba Bitai, Ahmad Janq,
Ibrahim Shek, Musa Sall, and all others like them, each one by his name and essence. I am completely
pleased with you all and I advise you to get to work in repairing the relationships between you, and abandon
the enemy who strives to break up your jama’ah—the enemy of Allah and His Messenger, Bayra Ngaye (may
Allah (t.) disgrace him)—and everything he has said, except his saying that he shows enmity to and wages
war against me. They have lied. “Those who act unjustly will know what will be their final resting place”
(Qur’an 26:227). Salam.
Ibrahim ibn al-Hajj Abdullahi al-Tijani (may Allah be kind to him, Amin)
5 Sha’ban 1377 AH

TITRE: The Letter of the Qur’an

The praise belongs to Allāh, ever-blessed and high. “Blessed is He in Whose Hand lies the dominion, and He is over all things powerful”. (Quran 67:1) “Blessed is He who sent down the Furqān on His servant to

be to the worlds an admonisher”. (Quran 25:1) I praise Him – glorious and ever-high - for the kind and
gracious gifts with which He has favoured us. He created and then fashioned, measured out and then
guided, He guided us to this and we would not have been guided had Allah not guided us. May s̩alāh and
peace be over our sayyid Muhammad, Seal of the prophets and messengers, whom Allah sent with guidance
and the religion of truth to make it appear above all religions, even though the polytheists may dislike it.
He has come to us after an interval without messengers and then he was born ‫ صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬in Makkah
al-Mukarramah. As he reached his full maturity, revelation descended upon him and he was sent as a caller
to Allah by His permission and as an illuminating lamp. Allah calls to the Abode of Peace [dār as-salām] and
guides whomever He wishes to a straight path. We believed in him and followed the light that was made to
descend with him. He saved us or, rather, all of humanity from the darknesses of ignorance. He freed us
from the adoration of other than Allah, the One [al-wāh̩id], the Overpowering [al-qahhār], put an end to
oppression and tyranny, established justice, truth and balance, spread the banners of brotherhood and
equality in rights as a lasting Sharīʽah and a clear light: “All of you are from Adam and Adam is from dust”.
“An Arab is not superior to a non-Arab, nor a non-Arab to an Arab, nor someone white to someone red,
nor someone red to someone white, except through taqwā”. People are equal like the teeth of a comb. “The
Truth has come and falsehood has perished. Indeed, falsehood is ever-perishing”. (Qur’an 17:81) Thus the
boastful racism of the Jews was gone - “We are Allah’s children and His beloved” (Qur’an 5:18) – before the
clear light and the triumphant truth, rather, you are human beings, part of those who have been created. He
forgives whomever He wills and punishes whomever He wills. Likewise, the fervor of Jāhiliyyah and its
taking pride in one’s forefathers were destroyed: “Indeed, the most honourable of you in Allah’s sight are the
one with most taqwā”. (Qurʼān 49:13)
For months the Muslim world has been celebrating the passing of fourteen centuries since the revelation of
the Qurʼān, that great Qurʼān, that glorious Qurʼān, that wise reminder [adh-dhikr al-h̩akīm]. It is indeed a
majestic reminder, worthy of being celebrated every year, every month, every Friday – nay, every morning
and evening. The Qurʼān is Allah’s strong rope, one extremity of which is in Allah’s hand and the other in
ours. A noble h̩adīth on the authority of [ʽAlī] ibn Abū T̩ālib – may Allah ennoble his face – says: “I heard
the Messenger of Allah ‫ صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬saying: ‘There will surely be a fitnah’, so I said: ‘What is the way out
of it, o Messenger of Allah ‫‘ ’?صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬A book containing news of what was before you, what will be
after you and the judgment concerning what is between you. It is the Decision [al-fas̩l] and it is not jesting
[laysa bi-l-hazl]. Any tyrant who abandons it is broken by Allah and whoever seeks guidance in other than it
is misled by Allah. It is Allah’s firm rope, the wise reminder, the straight path which is not crooked by

desires nor made ambiguous by the tongues [OR: with which desires cannot mislead and with which
tongues do not fall into mistake]. The scholars are never sated with it and it does not make people weary by
its being repeated much. Its marvels never end. This is what the Jinn, when they heard it, ended up saying:
‘We have, indeed, heard an amazing recitation. It leads to what is right, so we have believed in it’. (Qurʼān
72:1-2) Whoever speaks with it, says the truth. Whoever acts upon it, acts rightly. Whoever judges by it,
judges justly. Whoever is called to it is guided to a straight path.” [end of sayyidna ʽAlī’s quote]
Based on this, I see no need to elaborate further than these words. I simply give you a concise but
comprehensive advice, namely, to have faith in Allah alone; to hold on to His Wise Book, which is not
reached by falsehood neither from the front nor the back, a revelation from someone utterly wise and
praiseworthy; to cling to the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah ‫ صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬and flee as far as possible
from innovations; to recommend to each other truth and patience, o guests of Allah’s Messenger. Who can
ignore the reality facing this world? Tribulations [fitan] of all kinds threaten the world east and west, while
Muslims today are as we see and hear afflicted by delusions, sectarianism and disarray. “Were it not for
Allah’s pushing people one with the other, hermitages, churches, synagogues and mosques in which Allah’s
Name is mentioned [abundantly] would be destroyed.” (Qurʼān 22:40) This is because most Muslims today
have taken this Qurʼān as obsolete. Let our ʽĪd then be a way to repent to Allah Most High, Who said: “So,
why did they not, when our punishment came to them, humble themselves?” (Qurʼān 6:43) Let our ʽĪd be a
resolution to carry the message of the saving Qurʼān.
You have heard in the h̩adīth mentioned earlier how the sincere and trusted one [as̩-s̩ādiq al-mas̩dūq] ‫صلى هللا‬
‫ عليه وسلم‬described the message of the Noble Qurʼān in his eloquent prophetic statement by comprehensive
words which do not need any explanation, but are nonetheless needed in all explanations.
O brothers in Allah, I welcome every delegation that have come to this city to take part in the celebrations
of the noble prophetic birth, and I congratulate all those who are present with us in this occasion. I thank all
those who have striven to serve the guests of the Messenger of Allah ‫ صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬and ask Allah, the
High and Powerful, to write for us acceptance, happiness, success and victory in the two abodes. I also ask
Him – Most High – to destroy the Israeli groups, to free the Arab and Islamic lands which have been
occupied by the Jews with the help of the powers of evil and enmity, to purify Jerusalem from the dirt of the
Jews, to return to the Muslims the first of the two qiblahs, the third of the two H̩arams, the place of the
night journey of Allah’s Messenger – on him be Allah’s salāhs -, to enable the Muslim Ummah to be on its
guard and to return Jerusalem to the Ummah in a beautiful way – and that is not difficult for Allah.
Dear brothers, may your ʽĪd be good and may you be every year accompanied by goodness. Wa-s-salām.
Ibrāhīm Niasse al-Kawlakhī, from the city of Kaolack, Saturday 11th Rabīʽ al-Awwal, 1388 AH.
tflbwn

TITRE: Needs Title

In the Name of Allāh, the Compassionate and Merciful. May Allāh pray over our master Muh̩ammad, the
Opening Seal [al-fātih̩ al-khātim]. Here I come [labbayka], Allāhumma, here I come. I believe in You, I
believe in Your Messenger, our master Muh̩ammad, and I believe in Your Book, which You have sent down.
The praise belongs to Allāh for the perfection of Your Essence. The praise belongs to Allāh for Your
Messenger. The praise belongs to Allāh for the Qurʼān. The praise belongs to Allāh for Your Walī. The
praise belongs to Allāh for Islām, the two shahādahs, s̩alāh, zakāh, fasting and the H̩ajj. The praise belongs
to Allāh for the blessed month through which fasting has been prescribed on us, in which Heaven’s doors
are opened and those of Jah̩īm are closed, while the devils [shayt̩ān, pl. shayāt̩īn] are in chains. In it there is a
night better than a thousand months and whoever is deprived of its good has been deprived of all good, as it
has been authentically reported in the h̩adīths from Allāh’s Messenger ‫صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬.
Allāhumma, I make You, Your Prophet and Your angels my witnesses that I have heard, obeyed and
accepted, seeking Your help now and in the future, from beginning to end, and that I advise whoever listens
to advice to obey the commands, to seek help from Allāh, the Real, the Clarifier [al-mubīn], the Powerful
[al-qādir] and to take refuge with Allāh from the soul’s treachery and the accursed Iblīs’ plot. You must
observe dhikr, the recitation of the Qur’ān, tasbīh̩, istighfār and s̩alāh over the Prophet ‫ صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬in
the days and nights of Ramadan, along with plenty of charity [s̩adaqah], following Allah’s Messenger and the
righteous predecessors’ example. Allāh - ever-glorious and high - has said in the clear parts [muh̩kam] of the
Revelation [at-tanzīl]: “Allāh commands justice, doing good [ih̩sān] and giving to one’s relatives [dhi l-qurbā],
and He forbids obscenity, what is reprehensible and injustice [baghy]” (Q 16:90). He also said: “So, whoever
does an atom’s weight of good shall see it, and whoever does an atom’s weight of evil shall see it” (Q
99:7-8). It is particularly important to follow his lead - ‫ صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬- in hurrying to break one’s fast when
the Sun sets. He - ‫ صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬- used to break his fast before praying, either with some fresh dates or, if
he did not find any, with some dried dates. If he did not find either, he would break his fast with some sips
of water. He would say when breaking the fast: “Allāhumma, for You I have fasted and with Your provision
I broke my fast, so accept from me, You are the Hearing and Knowing.” He would also say when breaking
the fast: “The praise belongs to Allāh: thirst has gone, the veins have regained wetness and the reward is
firm, if Allāh - ever-high - wills.”
You must love our patron [mawlānā], the Messenger of Allah ‫صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬, due to the h̩adīth “Each is
with whom they love.” Its sign is to have much longing for him, listening to beautiful praises of him, the
Sunnah and the Qurʼān, all with a sincere intention, because he ‫ صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬has said: “Actions are only
by their intentions,” as related by the two Shaykhs. Beware of injustice, for he has said, ‫صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬:
“The quickest thing to be punished is injustice,” and beware of deceiving other Muslims. He ‫صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬
has said: “Whoever deceives us is not one of us,” which has been related by Muslim. Encourage each other
to goodness, as he ‫ صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬has said: “The pointer to good is like its doer.” You must perfect your

character, because he ‫ صلى هللا عليه وسلم‬said: “Indeed, you will not surpass people through your wealth, so
surpass them with your character.”
These are authentic [s̩ah̩īh̩] h̩adīths from the comprehensive words [jawāmiʽu l-kalim] that our Prophet ‫صلى‬
‫ هللا عليه وسلم‬was given, like are the following: “The religion [dīn] is ease, and none makes the religion difficult
except that it destroys them,” “. . . and the clever one is the one who takes himself to account and works for
what comes after death, while the heedless is he who follows his nafs and caprice [hawā] and entertains false
hopes about Allāh,” “Winter is the believer’s spring: its days are short so that he may fast through them and
its nights are long so that he may stand in prayer through them,” “A Muslim is he from whose tongue and
hand other Muslims are safe and an Emigrant [muhājir] is he who emigrates from what Allāh has forbidden,”
“The one who has no trustworthiness [amānah] has no faith [īmān] and the one who does not keep
promises [ʽahd] has no religion [dīn]” and others. Each of these h̩adīths contains the good of both abodes.
You must hold on to the Tijānī wirds, for they are indeed excellent wirds for spiritual education [tarbiyah].
You must converse with your beloveds about the affair of the Tijānī Seal, because it is better than all wirds,
especially during Ramad̩ān. You must mention his spiritual flood [fayd̩ah] by which Allāh has realized the
lordly [rabbānī] realities [h̩aqāʼiq] in your hearts and made you taste the divine [ilāhiyyah] sciences [maʽārif],
so that you may appreciate the value of this blessing and thank Allāh, and do not be ungrateful. You shall
receive copies of our work, Kāshifu l-Ilbās, which has been printed thanks to the charitable gift [nafaqah] of
the Sharīf from Fez, Muh̩ammad Abū T̩ālib. What is requested of you, since you were unable to purchase it
in the past, is to hurry to buy the copies, so that their owner may not encounter a loss by serving our
T̩arīqah. May Allāh make all of us firm in this life and the next with the firm statement [al-qawlu th-thābit]
and take care of all of us, for He takes care of the righteous [as̩-s̩ālih̩īn]. I send the greeting of peace to all
those who read these lines or hear their content with an ear disposed to obedience and I promise them the
good of the two abodes. Peace.

Dictated by Shaykh Ibrāhīm ibnu l-H̩ājj ʽAbdu Llāhi t-Tijānī in the city of Kaolack, 1354 AH.

TITRE: Needs Title

strongest sign of your being in the station [maqām] of thankfulness [shukr]. In fact, human beings have
been made such that they naturally complain when they should be thankful. However, I advise you –
being only a pointer to good, not a creator – the same that I advise to myself, namely, mindfulness
[taqwā] of Allāh in private and in public and to remain aware [murāqabah] of Allāh with each breath,
because none has ever attained their goal without it. Whoever does this has done what was on them, and
only what is on Allāh is left. I have read your words and seen your gift from beginning to end. You have
my permission to copy my hidden kunnāsh16 as well as absolute permission [idhn mut̩ laq] in it. I shall
send it to you along with the written license [ijāzah] and all the chains of transmission [asānīd]. I am
certain that you have grown according to my advice and are still following it. Peace.

           Ibrāhīm b. al-H̩ājj ʽAbd Allāh at-Tijānī

[FOOTNOTES]
16. A book or notebook where the Shaykhs note their secret formulas of dhikr and the like.

TITRE: Urging the Murids to Increase their Recital of Salatul Fatihi, and its Three Degrees

{Letter #28: From The Discourses of Shaykh Al-Islam Alhajj Ibrahim Niasse(RA)}

Compiled by: Shaykh Ahmad Abu’l Fat’hi (Maiduguri, Nigeria)

In The Name of Allah, The Most Gracious, The Most Merciful

May the peace and blessings of Allah be upon our master Muhammad, and also upon his family and
companions. All thanks and praise belongs to Allah—The One (Al-Wahid)—Who neither begets nor was He
begotten, and there is nothing like unto Him. May the peace and blessings of Allah be upon the Opener &
the Seal (Al-Fatihi Al-Khatimi), our master Muhammad (SAWS), and may Allah be pleased with the (hidden)
support of all of the worlds—seen and unseen (Madad al-Kaʾinat al-Awalim al-ʿAiniyya wa-l Ghaibiyya), our
master Ahmad al-Tijani(RA).

After this: I am sending my greeting of perfect peace—which contains no vanity or sin—to our beloved
brother, the Mufassir. May Allah guide us and him to that which He loves and is pleased with! May He heal
our hearts of their ailments and diseases, and grant us safety and felicity in both this life and the Hereafter.

Your noble letter has reached me and I am very happy to receive its contents; we have therefore turned our
spiritual energy (Himma) towards you! I am renewing your (affiliation with the Tariqa), the Wird al-Lazim,
the well-known Wazifa, Dhikr al-Jumuʿa of Friday—all with the special permission (Idhn al-Khass) from
Shaykh Ahmad al-Tijani (directly)! Congratulations to you for that!

Shaykh Ahmad al-Tijani (RA) said, “Whosoever is stamped with our seal is due congratulations.” What he
meant by that statement is, “Whosoever takes our Wird will achieve the felicity of this life and the next.” I
am therefore advising myself and you to have conscious awareness of Allah (Taqwa)—in both public and
private—and to occupy yourself with Allah to the exclusion of everything other than Him. You must know
that everything other than Him is likened unto a mirage which appears to a thirsty person, who thinks it to
be water until he comes up to it and he finds nothing!

You must take the Messenger of Allah(SAWS) as your greatest “means of approach” (Wasilat al-ʿUzma) by
sending many Salat upon him, as this is the path to travel for all of those who desire to arrive at the Gnosis
of Allah (Maʿrifa).

I am especially advising you to offer plenty “Salat al-Fatihi lima Ughliq” (The Prayer of the Opener)—for it is
the Greatest Treasure, Mysterious Secret, and Source of Divine Gnosis (Kanz al-Aʾzam wa Sirr al-Mutalsam
wa Ain al-Ma’arif al-Aqwam).

It has three (3) degrees to its recitation:

1.) Zahir

2.) Batin

3.) Batin al-Batin

As for the outer degree (Zahir), it consists of the reward of the good deeds of everything in the
universe—from its beginning to its end.

As for the inner degree (Batin), it consists of the reward of the hidden mysteries of the universe, from its
beginning to its end.

As for the most inner degree (Batin al-Batin), it consists of the greatest mysteries and secrets and it is the
goal of goals.

I therefore advise you to offer plenty Salat al-Fatihi in all of your spare time, day & night. I have thus
advised you for the sake of Allah! You must also persist in offering five hundred (500) Salat al-Fatihi after
Salat al-Ishaʾ before you go to sleep, and also repeat this amount in the late night (time of Tahajjud) and
also again after performing your morning Wird al-Lazim (for a total of 1500).

You will do this all with the intention to offer Salat upon the Prophet in obedience to the command of your
Lord—all out of love, glorification, and esteem for him and no other objective! If you diligently persist in
this, after receiving the special permission (Idhn al-Khass) from its people, you will certainly experience the
Spiritual Opening (Fath) by the Might and Power of Allah!

What I have written in this letter is all that I possess from the Secrets (Al-Asrar) and it is sufficient for me
and for you!

Salaam.

TITRE: Needs Title

In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, The Most Merciful. And may Allah send salutations on our
master Muhammad, the Opener, the Sealer, and upon his family based on his real worth and His great
measure.

From the City of Kaolack at the end of the year 1358 AH to all loved ones. May Allah allow us and you to
benefit in the two abodes.

All praise is due to Allah and that suffices. and peace be upon His servants who have been purified and
chosen. And upon his family, the loyal and pure. As to what comes next:

For indeed the times of the slave, as classified by Sheikh (Tijani rta), are four:

1. The time of obedience,
2. (the time of) disobedience,
3. (the time of) blessing,
4. (the time of) tribulation.

And its required reactions (Adab) are:
1. Witnessing (Allah's) grace (Shuhood al-minnah)
2. Repentance (Tawbah)
3. Gratitude (Shukr)
4. Fortitude (Sabr)

And this time, The Real (Al-Haqq) manifested in it with what every intelligent person sees: that He swt
wants to single out the special elect of His lovers via the outer appearance of subjugation and trial.
However, His trials are not bereft of His gifts (within the trials). And His (outer) subjugation does not exclude

His Gentleness (Lutfihi). However weakness in faith and intellect has dazed (people) and caused
heedlessness regarding Allah and consequently they complain a lot (negatively), turn away from Allah and
curse time (sub ad-Dahr). Nay, by Allah. Again, by Allah, we haven't encountered one hundredth of the
trials that those before us faced from the time of the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬to a time close to ours. However, we ask
Allah for permanent good health and excellence (Ihsan).

It should be noted that tribulation isn't a type of humiliation or degradation of the slave by Allah as the
ignorant masses think. For hunger, wars, plagues were more frequent during the time of the best
predecessors. The erudite scholar Muhyideen Nawawi said in Al-Adhkaar: "Know that the tribulations
(now) are small in comparison to the past. There were indeed 5 known plagues in (the) Islam(ic world).

1. The Yashairawiyyah plague that afflicted some cities at the time of the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬at 6 AH
2. The 'Amwaas plague in Syria at the time of Umar in which 25,000 people died, including Abu Ubaidah bin
Jarraah. 'Amwaas is a village between Ramallah and Jerusalem and it was named the plague of 'Amwaas
because a child would meet an adult male and say to him 'Amwaas'.
3. The Jaarif plague during the time of Ibn Zubayr in which 73 or 83 of Anas bin Maalik's (rta) children died.
And 40 of Abdul Rahman bin Abi Bakrah's children also died. And entire families in a house would die and
they would cement their doors with clay (to bury them and restrict the spreading of the plague). This was in
64 AH and it was called the Jaarif plague.
4. The Fatayaat plague in the year 87 AH. This was in Kufa and was named the Fatayaat plague (Fatayaat
means young women) because it started (by claiming the lives of) young women (lit. Virgins) in Basra until it
reached Syria and Kufa. It was also called the Plague of Honoured people (Ashraaf - usually used to describe
the family of the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬) due to the vast amount of Honourable people (Ashraaf) that died.
5. The plague that occurred in 131 AH and they used to count a thousand funeral processions (Janaazah) on
the street every day. 70,000 people died on the first day, and on the second day, half of 70,000 people, and on
the third day, it engulfed all the people (in the area).

No plague has ever affected the holy lands (Makkah and Madinah). And Nawawi concluded in his book by
saying: And whoever thinks that tribulations (for punishment) descend on a Slave (of God), then such a
person is ignorant and bereft of insight (Lit. blind-hearted). Rather a believer is tested according to the level
of his religion (Deen). As (righteous people like) Uthman, Umar, Ali, Ibn Zubair, and Ibn Jabir were killed.
Ibn Musayyib was lashed severely until his shoulders were dislocated. May Allah be pleased with him.

Alas, based on this, what I advise myself and advise my loved ones to is to be Pleased (Rida) with Allah ta'ala
and to be grateful to Him. And to show fortitude regarding all that emanates from His destined affairs. And
to have absolute trust in Him (Tawakkul) regarding sustenance (Rizq). For (Allah) ta'ala has said: "And in
heaven is [the source of] your sus­tenance [on earth] and [of] all that you are promised [for your life after

death]. For, by the Sustainer of heaven and earth, this is the very truth - as true as that you are endowed with
speech!" (Surah Dhaariyaat vs. 22-23). And (Allah) ta'ala has said: "I have only created Jinn and men so that
they may worship me" (Surah Dhaariyaat vs. 52).

(Allah) swt knew that they (His creation) have human necessities that could interfere with their absolute
focus on (His) worship, hence, He guaranteed their sustenance so that they may dedicate themselves wholly
to His service and would not be engulfed with seeking sustenance in such a way that would divert them
from His worship. And so He (Allah) said: "I do not want any sustenance from them" i.e. I don't want them
to provide sustenance for themselves (emphasis by translator) as I have guaranteed that for them with
perfect measure and by the presence of my guarantee (i.e. These eternal words in the Quran). (And He swt
said) "And I don't want them to feed me." Because I am The Strong (Al-Qawiyy), The Uncaused Cause of
all being (As-Samad) that neither eats nor is fed. And because of that, He concluded it (the verse) with His
saying "Verily Allah is The Provider of all sustenance, The Lord of All Might, The Eternal" (Surah
Dhaariyaat vs. 58). Meaning I don't want them to fend for themselves because I am The Provider of All
Sustenance for them and I don't want them to feed me because I am The Lord of All Might. And the one
who possesses All Might in His Essence is free from the need of being fed. So these compiled verses should
serve as a guarantee for the servants regarding their sustenance. especially His words: "Verily Allah is the
Provider of All Sustenance". So He commanded the believers to realise that there is only a solitary source of
their sustenance and never to associate any part of it (their sustenance) to any of His creatures nor to any of
their manifest "causes" (asbaab) and not to link their sustenance to their efforts. For the believer thanks
Allah swt when he finds basic food (with no extravagance) for the day. Most of his ‫ ﷺ‬food was water and dates. And when he ‫ ﷺ‬didn't even find these to eat, he would show fortitude and tie a stone to his
stomach. Mostly he ‫ ﷺ‬wouldn't find enough food to fill his stomach. He ‫ ﷺ‬would spend many
consecutive nights starving whilst his family would find nothing to eat. And by Allah, the poet beautifully
composed:

If the dunya was a reward to the Good doers (Muhsin)
Then there'll be no sustenance for the oppressor (Dhaalim)
The noble prophets encountered hunger in it
Yet, the stomachs of cattle were filled in it.

And it is necessary for the believer to seek true refuge with Allah, to intensely supplicate to Him, to pray for
self content / happiness, to pray for the people of Islam, to seek protection with what has been narrated
from the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬, to regularly send (prayers) solawaat on the prophet, especially with solaatul faatihi.
For the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬is the door of mercy and all good in the dominion and celestial worlds (Al-mulk wal
Malakuut). And there is nothing wrong with memorising this prayer on the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬, even though it's
lower in rank and grace (Fadl) in comparison to solaatul faatihi by many levels. The Shaykhs have mentioned
that whoever says it a thousand times when afflicted with a worry/grief, Allah swt will remove the
worry/grief. And he will grant him what is (written) for him. And whoever recites it numerous times during

plagues will be saved from it (plagues). And whoever recites it when at sea will be saved from drowning. and
much more. and it is:

‎ً‫ وتُطَهِّرُنا‬، ‫ت‬  ِ ‫ضي لَنا بِها َجمي َع الحاجا‬      ِ ‫ وتَ ْق‬، ‫ت‬        ِ ‫يع اَأل ْه َو‬
                                                                  ِ ‫ال واآلفا‬           ِ ‫صالة تُ ْن ِجينا بِها ِمن َج ِم‬                                                            َ ‫اللَّهُ َّم‬
                                                                                                                           َ ، ‫ وعَلى آل َسيِّ ِدنا‬، ‫صلِّ عَلى َسيِّ ِدنا ُم َح َّم ٍد‬
‫ت‬                                   ِ ‫يع ال َخيْرا‬
ِ ‫ت فِي ال َحيا ِة َوبَ ْع َد ال َمما‬                                        ْ ‫َأ‬         ِّ
                                                                          َ ‫ وتُبَل ُغنا بِها ق‬، ‫ت‬                      ‫َأ‬
                                                                                                   ِ ‫ وتَرْ فَعُنا بِها ِع ْندَك ْعلى ال َّد َرجا‬، ‫ت‬
                                                                                                                                                   ِ ‫يع ال َّسيِّئا‬
                                                ِ ‫ت ِمن َج ِم‬   ِ ‫صى الغايا‬                                                                                        ِ ‫بِها ِمن َج ِم‬

ALLAHUMMA SALLI ALA SAYYIDINA MUHAMMAD WA ALA AALI SAYYIDINA
MUHAMMADIN SALAATAN TUNJEENA BIHA MIN JAMI’IL AHWAALI WAL’AFAATI WA
TAQDILANA BIHA JAMEE'AL HAAJAATI WATU TAHIRUNA BIHA MIN JAMI’IS SAYYI AATI
WATAR FA’UNA BI HAA INDAKA A’LAD DARAJAATI WATU BAL LIGHUNA BIHA AQSAL
GHAAYAATI MIN JAMI’IL KHAIRAATI FIL HAYAATI WABA’DAL MAMAATI

O Allah! Bestow blessings upon Sayyidina Muhammad and his Family, such blessings by means of which Thou mayst relieve us of all anxieties and calamities. Thou mayst satisfy all our needs. Thou mayst clean us of all evils and, for which, Thou mayst grant us high position and high rank and status in Thy presence, and Thou mayst lead us to the utmost limit of our aspirations and capacity in whatever is best in this world as well as in the world Hereafter.

And these are special lines that some trustworthy scholars compiled that give protection from the harm of
fire and theft and all trials, and they are:

Taha has never slumbered... nor has he ever yawned for the whole of existence
From Him is all that moves, and never has a fly run or landed on his perfect body
Whether from behind or in front of him, his vision is sharp. his shadow is never seen in the sun by the
sharp-eyed
His shoulders rose above people when they sat ... during childbirth in a row, O circumcised one
These special traits, memorise them and you'll be safe... from the harm of fire, theft and trials.

And for safety from the fears of this world and the hereafter one says the following three times mornings
and evenings

..‫ َو لِ ُكلِّ َرخا ٍء َو‬. ‫ َو لِ ُكلِّ نِ ْع َم ٍة ال َح ْم ُد هَّلِل‬.ُ‫ َو لِ ُكلِّ هَ ٍّم َو َغ ٍّم ما شا َء هللا‬.ِ‫واآلخ َر ِة ال ِإ ٰلهَ ِإالَّ هللاُ ُم َح َّم ٌد َرسُو ُل هللا‬
                                                                                                                                                                                  ِ          ‫ت لِ ُكلِّ هَوْ ٍل َأ ْلقاهُ فِي ال ُّد ْنيا‬  ُ ‫َأ ْع َد ْد‬
ِّ‫ َو لِ ُكل‬.ُ‫ق َح ْسبِ َي هللا‬     ٍ ‫ضي‬ِ ِّ‫ َو لِ ُكل‬. َ‫راجعُون‬     ِ ‫صيبَ ٍة إنّا هلل َو إنّا ِإلَ ْي ِه‬                                             ٍ ‫ َو لِ ُكلِّ َذ ْن‬.ِ‫ َو لِ ُكلِّ ُأ ْعجُوبَ ٍة ُس ْب َحانَ هللا‬.ِ ‫ِش َّد ٍة ال ُّش ْك ُر هَلِل‬
                                                                                                             ِ ‫ َو لِ ُكلِّ ُم‬.َ ‫ب َأ ْستَ ْغفِ ُر هّللا‬
‫ون ﷽ بِسْم هللاِ ماشا َء هللاُ ال‬               ٍ ‫ َو لِ ُكلِّ َح َر َك ٍة و ُس ُك‬.‫ْصيَ ٍة ال َحوْ َل َوال قُ َّوةَ إالَّ بِاهللِ ال َعلِ ِّي ْال َع ِظ ِيم‬   ِ ‫ َو لِ ُكلِّ طا َع ٍة َو َمع‬.ِ‫ت َعلَى هللا‬          ُ ‫َر تَ َو َّك ْل‬
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ٍ ‫ضا ٍء َو قَد‬   َ َ‫ق‬
‫َحوْ َل َوال قُ َّوةَ إالَّ بِاهللِ ال َعلِ ِّي ْال َع ِظ ِيم‬

A'dadtu likulli hawlin Alqaahu fi dunya wal aakhirati laa ilaah illallaah muhammadun rasulullah
Wa likulli Ham-min wa Ghammin maa shaa Allah
Wa likulli ni'matin alhamdulillaah
Wa likulli rakhaain wa shiddatin
ash-shukrulillaah
Wa likulli u'jubatin Subhanallaah,
Wa likulli dhanbin astaghfirullaah
Wa likulli musiibatin inna lillaahi wa innaa ilaihi raajiuun,
Wa likulli Deeqin hasbiyallaah
Wa likulli Qadaa in wa qadariin tawakkaltu 'alallaah
Wa likulli Taa'atin wa musiibatin laa hawla wa laa quwwata illa billaahil 'aliyyil 'adhiim
Wa likulli harakatin wa sukoonin Bismillaahir rahmaani raheem
Bismillah. Maa shaa Allah. laa hawla wa laa quwwata illa billaahil 'aliyyil 'adhiim

For every fear I'll encounter in the dunya and the hereafter, my prepared fortitude is "There is no god but
Allah and Muhammad is the messenger of Allah".

For every worry and grief, my prepared fortitude is: "Whatever Allah wills".

For every blessing, my prepared reaction is "All praise belongs to Allah".

For every comfort and hardship, my prepared reaction is "All thanks belong to Allah".

For every amazing encounter, my prepared reaction is "Far exalted is Allah above all associations".

For every sin, my prepared reaction is "I seek Allah's forgiveness".

For every calamity, my prepared reaction is "Indeed we belong to Allah and we are surely returning to Him".

For every constraint, my prepared reaction is "Allah suffices me".

For everything encountered in destiny, my prepared reaction is "I put my absolute trust in Allah".

For every act of obedience and disobedience, my prepared reaction is "There is no Might nor power except
by Allah, The Most High, The Most Magnificent."

For every movement and stillness, my prepared reaction is "In the name of Allah, The Most Beneficent, The
Most Merciful.
In the name of Allah... Whatever Allah wills. There is no Might nor power except by Allah, The Most High,
The Most Magnificent."

And the remembrance of Allah in all its forms is beneficial for the slave short-term and long-term. And
beware of being heedless of Him. In the book "The Pure Gold" Ibn Juzayy said: Remembrance of Allah
(Dhikr) has many forms and each form has specific benefits and fruits (results).

As for (repeating) "Laa ilaha illa llaahu" (There is no god but Allah), its result is Special Monotheism
(Tawheed Khaas). The general monotheism is attainable by every believer. As for (repeating) "Allahu
Akbar" (Allah is greatest), its result is Veneration (Ta'dheem). As for Praise (Al-Hamd) and names that have
meanings of Mercy and Perfection (Ihsaan) like "The Beneficient", "The Merciful", "The Generous", "The
Extremely Forgiving", they result in Gratitude (Shukr), and Strong Hope (in Allah) and Love (for Allah). For
surely, the Good doer (Muhsin) is loved without a doubt (i.e. by remembering all these beautiful names of
Allah, you'll love Him). And as for (repeating) "La hawla wa la quwwata illa billahi Al-Aliyyil Adheem"
(There is no Might nor power except by Allah the Most High, The Magnificent) and "Hasbunallaahu wa
ni'mal wakeel" (Allah is sufficient for us and what an excellent one to entrust), they result in having absolute
reliance in Allah (Tawakkul) and absolute delegation of authority to Him (Tafweed) and Trust (in Him). As
for sending salutations on the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬, it results in extreme love for him ‫ ﷺ‬and following his example (Sunnah). As for seeking forgiveness, it results in consistency in being God-Conscious and ensuring
that one fulfils the conditions of repentance. And all of these are contained in the Unique Remembrance

which is when we say: Allah Allah. As that is The Utmost Goal and to Him is the final destination (of
everything).

As for the Special Monotheism (Tawheed Khaas), it is to see that actions, in their entirety, are from Allah swt
alone. And that's by means of unveiling, not by means of showing juristic evidence. As the means of juristic
evidence are attainable by every believer.

And whoever is not able to memorise any of the things we've mentioned (above), then it will suffice him to
recite Suratul Ikhlaas and the two refuge seeking chapters (Suratul Falaq and Naas) in the mornings and evenings
for protection. And also to say (mornings and evenings)

َ َ‫ت ِم ْن َشرِّ ما َخل‬
‫ق‬                                        ِ ‫َأعُو ُذ بِ َكلِما‬
                      ِ ‫ت هللاِ التَا َّما‬

A'uthu bi kalimaatillaahi taammaati min sharri ma khalaqa

I seek refuge in the complete words of Allah from the evil He created.

                                                        ِ ْ‫بِسْم هللاِ الَّ ِذي ال يَضُرُّ َم َع ا ْس ِم ِه َش ْي ٌء فِي اَألر‬
‫ض َو ال فِي السَّما ِء َو هُ َو ال َّس ِمي ُع ال َعلِي ُم‬

Bismillahi ladhee laa yadurru ma’a ismihi shay-un fil ardi, wa laa fi samaa’i wa Huwa Samee’ul ‘Aleem

In the Name of Allah with whose Name no harm shall come to anything in the earth nor in the heavens and
He is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing.

And as for the one who is incapable of doing all of that, then his mandatory wird (wird laazim of the Tariqa)
in the morning and evening and the wazifah in the zawiya will suffice him to keep him safe and to always
have ablution. And there is no benefit in mixing with the people of argumentation and those who seek out
the faults of the masses. And also, (there is no benefit in) magic and fortune-tellers. For the One who Harms
and Benefits is Allah. And the means (waseelah) is the messenger of Allah ‫ﷺ‬

I seek Allah's forgiveness for myself and for you. And I ask Allah ta'ala to grant me and you what will make
your eyes glitter with joy in the two abodes. And I hope for myself and for you, a manifestation of honour
and respect and complete renunciation.

And may peace be upon you, together with Allah's Mercy and Blessings.

Ibrahim the son of Alhaj Abdullah At-Tijani.
End of year 1358 AH.


TITRE: LETTER #



TITRE: On Whether the Shaykhs Are Intermediaries for Every Science that Allah Transmits to Their Students

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

A heartfelt salutation, without any extravagance or dissimulation to our brother, our beloved, and our son
with whom we are well pleased, my friend and namesake, Ibrahim b. al-Sayyid Masb. What follows is a brief
response to your question, which is, in summary:

"Are the Shaykhs intermediaries in all of the sciences, ma'rifah, and various kinds of actions that Allah
grants their students?"

The answer is that Allah (Blessed and Exalted is He) is the One who gives and the One who withholds.
And the Muhammadan Reality is the distributor. This is what is indicated in the hadith:

"I am the distributor. But Allah is the giver."

And the Muhammadan Reality has a Khalifah in the universe in every age. And nothing arrives to the
universe except through the mediation of that Khalifah. He has deputies, Khalifahs, and points of
manifestation by the mediation of whom he gives. So when he looks towards the heart of a slave, or a murid,
or a student, or whatever the person may be, and he finds in it love for one of his instruments, he gives him
whatever Allah wills and determines for him, and places it in his hand. But if he does not find in the heart of
the slave any love for his instruments or his points of manifestation, he does not give him anything at that
particular time. For that reason, Yusuf, the Siddiq said:

{"I seek the refuge of Allah [to prevent] that we take except him with whom we found our possession.} [Yusuf,
79].

Understand. And may Allah grant you and us understanding, by His grace and generosity.

Thereafter, I charge you with gathering the brethren, men, and women, and telling them that I am
reminding them of Allah and of the covenant that is between us, that they should fulfill what Allah has made
obligatory upon them and leave what He has forbidden them. And you should all be steadfast in enlivening
the House of Allah with obligatory acts, which are the five prayers and gathering for the Wazifa. And it is
especially obligatory for the one who lives in a city that has a Mosque dedicated to the Friday prayer to
attend that prayer every week. He said (Exalted is He):

{Maintain with care the [obligatory] prayers and [in particular] the middle prayer and stand before Allah,
devoutly obedient.} [al-Baqarah, 238].

And He has also said (Exalted is He):

{O you who have believed, when [the adhan] is called for the prayer on the day of Jumu'ah [Friday], then
proceed to the remembrance of Allah} [al-Jum'a, 9].

If anyone misses Jum'a three times without any excuse, Allah will seal his heart with the seal of hypocrisy.

The reality is that many of you play games with Allah, His Messenger, the Shaykh, and with me. And if
anyone does that and he is afflicted with degradation in this world and the next, he should blame only
himself. That is because every disobedience results in retribution in this world or the next.

{So repent to your Creator and kill yourselves. That is best for you in the sight of your Creator."}
[al-Baqarah, 54].

As long as claims are not backed up by
proofs, their children are illegitimate.

And the women have the same obligations as the men. But it is also emphasized for them to obey their
spouses. If any one of them disobeys the command of Allah to obey her husband, she will be found wanting
in following the right path and in love.

Written by Ibrahim b. al-Hajj Abdullah al-Tijani.

Asking for you and me success and guidance.

Koussi, 1351 Hijri

TITRE: LETTER #



TITRE: LETTER #



TITRE: Conditions of Dhikr al-Jumu’ah

Question 18: the minimum by which the waz̩īfah of Friday is caught so that the individual is not

considered negligent.
          Allah guides to what is correct. The conditions of the Friday dhikr are congregation (ijtimāʽ),17
loudness (jahr)18 and to form a circle (tah̩līq) from the ʽAs̩ r prayer to sunset without a specific number.
Alternatively, from one hour or half an hour before sunset to sunset if the dhākir has brothers in the city,
and if not, he uses as a number 1000 or up to a maximum of 1600, without exceeding 1600. The best
option, as Shaykh ʽUmar said in ar-Rimāh̩,19 is 1500. It is said in al-Bughyah20 “the condition of this
dhikr is the congregation”, intending, however, along with loudness and forming a circle if there are
brothers in the city. Otherwise, he should recite the Haylalah alone from the ʽAs̩ r prayer to sunset
without a number. If he has other commitments, he should delay the Haylalah until about one and a half
hours before sunset, and then recite it until sunset. If he wishes, he can choose a fixed number for
himself and stick to it, from 1000 and above, without an upper limit, i.e.: without a limit for what is
added to the 1000, according to what has been said by the author of the poem21 – may Allāh have mercy
on him – and is relied upon. Allāh knows best.
          The author of al-Jāmiʽ22 said about the specification of this number that it should be fifteen
hundred [=1500] or more. It has been related from some of the pillars23 of the T̩arīqah 1600 and from
others 1200, the latter being that upon which the author of al-Jayshu l-Kafīl 24 relied. On the other side,
from my sayyid, the venerable, glorious, noble, our patron Muh̩ammad b. Abū an-Nas̩ r – may Allah
sanctify his secret – only 1000 is reported. The words of the poem’s author25 cover all these different
reports, except that increasing it to 1600 has not been preserved on anyone’s authority, nor has it reached
us that anyone acts upon it. All this is with regards to the Haylalah in the modality that is found in the
Waz̩īfah. I have been told by someone trustworthy that he once sat with the ʽĀrif bi-Llāh Sayyidī
Ah̩mad Sukayrij – may Allāh be pleased with him – after ʽAs̩ r on a Friday until the Sun had almost set,
so they said: “We have forgotten the dhikr of Friday”, so he said and ordered them to sit and they said
“lā ilāha illa Llāh” several times. He said to them: “Even if we had said it only once, it would have

sufficed”, and there is no need to mention his eminence, cautiousness and experience in the Tijānī
T̩arīqah.

[FOOTNOTES]
17. I.e.: to be performed in a group.
18. I.e.: such that it can be heard by the other participants and not only by oneself.
19. Rimāhu H̩izbi r-Rahīm, one of the main texts of the Tijānī T̩arīqah, authored by Shaykh ʽUmar al-Fūtī.
20. Bughyatu l-Mustafīd, one of the main texts of the Tijānī T̩arīqah, authored by Shaykh Muh̩ammad al-ʽArabī b. as-S̄̄āʼih̩.
21. The poem is Munyatu l-Murīd, of which al-Bughyah is the main explanation (sharh̩). Its author is Ah̩mad Tijānī b. Sīdī Bābā al-ʽAlawī ash-Shinqīt̩ī.
22. Al-Jāmiʽu li-Durari l-ʽUlūmi l-Fāʼid̩ah, another main text of the T̩arīqah, authored by Shaykh Muh̩ammad b. al-Mashrī.
23. I.e.: its well-known and accepted masters and authorities.
24. Another Tijānī text, authored by Muh̩ammad b. Muh̩ammad as̩-S̩aghīr b. Anbuja ash-Shinqīt̩ī.
25. See note above on Munyatu l-Murīd.

