The Removal of Confusion
The Removal of Confusion
Concerning the Flood
of the Saintly Seal A╕mad al-Tijānī
A Translation of
Kāshif al-Ilbās ‘an Faydat
al-Khatm Abī al-‘Abbās
by
Shaykh al-Islam
Al-╔ājj Ibrāhīm b. ‘Abd-Allah Niasse
Biography of Author by Sayyid ‘Alī Cisse
Introduction by Shaykh ╔asan b. ‘Alī Cisse
╔adīth Analysis by Shaykh Tijānī b. ‘Alī Cisse
Translation by Zachary Wright, Muhtar Holland and
Abdullahi El-Okene
FONS VITAE
2009
copyright page
v
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements vii
Background to the Text ix
Note on Translation xxi
Biography of Authors xxiii
Arabic Transliteration Key xxvii
Introduction to the 2001 Arabic Edition by Shaykh ╔asan Cisse xxix
Biography of the Author, Shaykh Ibrāhīm Niasse xxxiii
Author’s Foreword lvii
General Introduction 1
Section I
1 Concerning the Reality of Sufism 23
2 The Excellence of Allah’s Remembrance (dhikr) 38
3 Congregating for the Remembrance and Awakening the
Desire for Reading the Qur’ān 56
Section II
1 Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within the Tijāniyya 81
2 Spiritual Experiences (adhwāq) and their Foundation in
the Qur’ān and Sunnah 111
3 The Sphere of Spiritual Training in the Tariqa Tijāniyya 122
vi THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Section III
1 Warning Against Criticizing the Spiritual Elite, and
Those for Whom Criticism in Permissible 135
2 Seeking the Shaykh, his Character and the State of
Discipleship 159
3 The Vision of Allah 177
Conclusion
Our Confidant Reliance on the Tijānī Spiritual Path 193
Author’s Appendix
Introduction: On Spiritual Training and Saintly Authority 205
Appendix
I Concerning the Sufi Path 231
II Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 240
III The Ecstatic Utterances of the Enraptured Ones 307
IV The Aspirant Who Becomes Extinct to Himself 319
V The Vision of Allah within the Realm of Possibility 338
VI Racial Discrimination in the Spiritual Path 347
VII Femininity and Sainthood 356
VIII Ecstasy and the Spiritual Concert 365
IX Concerning Spiritual Retreat, the Qur’ān and the Spiritual
Path 369
Conclusion of the Appendix 371
Glossary of Arabic Terms 373
Sources for the Kāshif 379
Prominent Personalities 389
vii
Acknowledgements
ll thanks and praise is to Allah, the First, the Last.
Success in this endeavor is by His Grace alone, all
mistakes are from our own ignorance and ego-selves.
Working on this manuscript has been a tremendous blessing
for all those concerned. We can only pray that our meager
efforts have managed to transmit a small portion of the force
and clarity of the original Arabic text.
The English translation of the Kāshif would not have been
realized without the support and encouragement of the late
Shaykh ╔asan Cisse and his brother and successor, Shaykh
Tijānī Cisse, may Allah be pleased with them both. It was they
who entrusted the completion of this translation, first to
Abdullahi El-Okene, and lastly to Zachary Wright. A first
draft of excerpts of the work was realized through the efforts
of Kamal al-Hadi al-Husayni, who first commissioned Muhtar
Holland to translate the book. Special thanks are also due to
M.D. Yusuf and Dawud Jeffries for their support in the final
printing of this translation.
The final product found here benefitted from the insights
and hard-work of countless others: Fakhruddin Owaisi (South
Africa), Sa’ad Abu Bakr al-Maidugari (Nigeria), and Najmirah
A
viii THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Abdullah (Senegal-South Africa) for translation advice; and
Ashaki Taha-Cisse, Yahya Weldon, and Yusuf Hilliard for
editing assistance. Appreciation is also due to Professors
Rüdiger Seesemann (Northwestern) and Ousmane Kane
(Columbia) for their comments, corrections and advice on the
manuscript.
Proceeds from the sale of this book are donated to the
ongoing construction of the Grand Mosque in Medina-Baye
Kaolack, Senegal, first established by Shaykh Ibrāhīm Niasse
in 1937.
May Allah accept.
ix
Background to the Text
he Kāshif al-Ilbās is the magnum opus of twentiethcentury West Africa’s greatest Muslim leader, Shaykh
al-Islam Ibrāhīm ‘Abd-Allah Niasse (1900-1975). No
Sufi master can be reduced to a single text, and the mass
following of Shaykh Ibrāhīm, described as the largest single
Muslim movement in modern West Africa,1 most certainly
found its primary inspiration in the brilliant career and
spiritual zeal of the Shaykh rather than written words. Indeed,
this very book relates the words of an earlier Sufi: “You have
taken your knowledge from the scholars of the written texts,
like a dead man from a dead man. But we have received our
knowledge from the Ever-Living who never dies.”
Even if recent academic research has rightly devalued the
role of texts in the transmission of Sufi knowledge,2 none can
deny the continued relevance of studying the writings of
prominent Sufis. Moreover, serious textual consideration of

1. Mervyn Hiskett, The Development of Islam in West Africa (London:
Longman, 1984), p. 287.
2. Proceedings from the workshop, “Sufi Texts, Sufi Contexts,” Institute for
the Study of Islamic Thought in Africa (ISITA), Northwestern University
(May 28-29, 2007), particularly the presentations of Carl Ernst, Valerie
Hoffman and Rüdiger Seesemann.
T
x THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
West African Sufism has been stifled by lingering colonial
prejudice of a supposedly distinct, synchronistic Islam Noir
(“Negro Islam”) and by thinly-veiled disdain for black African
scholars, sometimes even within Muslim scholarly circles.3
Time and again, received knowledge concerning African
Muslims’ lack of scholarly qualifications substitutes for actual
study of their teachings and writings. No wonder that today
those interested in the texts of Sufis for their original purpose
– as an encouragement on the path to God – have mostly
found themselves relegated to the writings of Persian and
Arab Sufi masters. West African Sufi writings deserve a closer
look. “Indeed,” writes Shaykh Ibrāhīm in the Kāshif,
“blackness of the skin does not prevent entry among the rank
of those drawn near to the Lord.”

3. A prominent French writer, for example, said Shaykh Ibrāhīm’s books
“apparently lack originality” (J.C. Froelich, Les Musulmans d’Afrique Noire,
Paris, 1962, p. 236). A later Islamologist, Michel Chodkiewicz, concludes that
Shaykh Ibrāhīm Niasse had no direct contact with the writings of Ibn al-
‘Arabī (d. 1240), one of Islam’s greatest thinkers. This can only mean it was
Chodkiewicz who never had direct contact with Shaykh Ibrāhīm’s writings:
the Kāshif is in fact replete with precise chapter references to Ibn al-‘Arabī’s
greatest works. See Chodkiewicz, Ocean without Shore: Ibn ‘Arabî, the Book and
the Law (SUNY Press, 1993), p. 10-11. A version of Chodkiewicz’s
introduction to Ocean without Shore also appears separately as “The
Diffusion of Ibn ‘Arabi’s Doctrine” in Journal of the Muhyiddin Ibn ‘Arabi
Society, Volume IX (1991). Chodkiewicz writes in this latter piece: “A
dissident of the Tijâniyya, Ibrâhîm Nyass could assuredly find many
elements of akbarian origin in the masters of this tarîqa. But I am led to
believe that his eschatological beliefs owe a lot to the Yawâqît [of Sha’rānī],
and very little (or more likely nothing) to an assiduous familiarity with the
works of Ibn ‘Arabi.” It seems to have escaped Chodkiewicz that the Kāshif
contains frequent precise references to the works of Ibn al-‘Arabī, but only
one reference to Sha’rānī’s Yawāqīt. Indeed, Chodkiewicz’s characterization
of Niasse, whom he mistakenly labels as a “dissident” and elsewhere as
“another black African Sufi,” seems prejudiced from the start.
Background to the Text xi
Understanding the contents of the Kāshif al-Ilbās requires
some background of the life and mission of its author.4 Shaykh
Ibrāhīm was a Muslim scholar and sage of the Tijāniyya Sufi
order. The Tijāniyya has spread to all corners of the Muslim
world since Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī (d. 1815, Fes) established
the confraternity in North Africa in the late eighteenth
century. Many eminent scholars have emerged among the
Tijāniyya in the last two centuries, but none has been as
successful in propagating the Order as Shaykh Ibrāhīm. It is
currently estimated that those owing their initiation into the
Tijāniyya to Shaykh Ibrāhīm number around one hundred
million and make up more than half of all the Tijānīs in the
world.5
Shaykh Ibrāhīm explained his historical mission in
spreading Islam and the Tijāniyya throughout West Africa and
beyond as being endowed with al-Fay╓at al-Tijāniyya, the
“Tijānī Flood” predicted by Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī that
would occasion people entering the Tijānī spiritual path group
upon group. If fay╓a was the doctrine, the distinguishing
practice of Shaykh Ibrāhīm’s movement was tarbiya, or

4. For more information on the life and thought of Shaykh Ibrāhīm Niasse,
see Rüdiger Seesemann, The Divine Flood: Ibrāhīm Niasse and the Roots of a
Twentieth-Century Sufi Revival (Oxford University Press, forthcoming);
Joseph Hill, “Divine Knowledge and Islamic Authority: Religious
Specialization among Disciples of Baay Ñas” (Ph.D. Thesis, Anthropology,
Yale University, 2007); Andre Brigaglia, “The Fayda Tijaniyya of Ibrahim
Nyass: Genesis and Implications of a Sufi Doctrine,” in Islam et Sociétés au
sud du Sahara,14-15 (2001); Ousmane Kane, “Shaykh al-Islam al-Hajj Ibrahim
Niasse,” in Robinson and Triaud (eds.), Le Temps des Marabouts, Itinéraires et
stratéfies islamiques en Afrique occidentale française v. 1880-1960 (Karthala,
2000); Mervyn Hiskett, “The Community of Grace and its opponents, the
rejecters,” in African Language Studies, n. 17 (1980).
5. Statistics presented by Shaykh ╔asan Cisse at the International Tijani
Forum in Fes, Morocco, June 28, 2007.
xii THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
spiritual training. Through tarbiya, aspirants transcended the
confines of their ego-selves and “tasted” the directlyexperienced knowledge, or gnosis (ma’rifa), of God. Certainly
this practice was nothing new within Sufism or the Tijāniyya
itself, but Shaykh Ibrāhīm’s ability to help millions attain the
highly valued spiritual illumination (fat╕) was surely
unprecedented. Of course, there is much more to the story of
Shaykh Ibrāhīm – his ground-breaking legal rulings, his
creation of a grass-roots pan-African and pan-Islamic
movement, his world travels and close relations with some of
his days most renowned revolutionary leaders (Kwame
Nkrumah, Sekou Touré and Gamal Abdel Nasser for example)
– but this concept of a flood of gnosis, spiritual illumination
for all who desired it, was the key to understanding the
Shaykh’s life and mission.
The Kāshif al-Ilbās, written early on in the Shaykh’s career
in 1931-1932, is primarily a justification for the teaching of the
experiential knowledge (ma’rifa) of God on a widespread scale.
The self’s complete immersion and annihilation in the Divine
Essence, which Sufism has long maintained is essential for
true knowledge of God, is a concept that has been fraught
with tension throughout Islamic history, both among the
detractors of Sufism and among Sufis themselves. The aspirant
who becomes “enraptured” in God may behave as one absent
from his senses or he may make extraordinary spiritual claims.
The Kāshif thus presents the means of attaining gnosis (ma’rifa)
and the results of such knowledge for its possessor; in the
process differentiating false pretentions from sincere
expression, delusion from real experience, heresy from Islamic
orthodoxy.
Background to the Text xiii
While the issue of Divine gnosis was certainly one of the
issues current in early twentieth-century West Africa, it was
not the only issue of dispute Shaykh Ibrāhīm was responding
to in the Kāshif. Around the time the Kāshif was written, there
seems to have been a lively debate in Senegal over whether it
was possible to “see” God. This debate would erupt in a series
of polemical exchanges immediately after the Kāshif’s writing
between the followers of Shaykh Ibrāhīm and A╕mad Dem (d.
1973), a Fulani scholar living in Sokone, Senegal.6 Another
debate was the century-old dispute between scholars of the
Tijānī and Qādirī Sufi orders in Northern Nigeria over
whether Sufis should recite their liturgies silently or out loud
in public. Still another question addressed by the Kāshif
concerned the emergence of the “Tijānī Flood,” an issue
frequently discussed among Tijānī scholars in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, especially among the
Idaw ‘Alī people of Mauritania. Other questions emerged with
the triumph of Sufi leaders over traditional forms of authority
in West African society in the early twentieth century. For
example, what was the spiritual identity and social role of
women in the new religious order of the Sufi shaykhs? To all
of these questions, Shaykh Ibrāhīm devoted separate sections
of the Kāshif.
The contemporary reader will notice, however, that the
Kāshif is not a work bound by the historical debates of its time.

6. A╕mad Dem’s polemical work against the possibility of “seeing” God was
entitled Tanbī╕ al-Aghbiyā’. It produced immediate refutations from ‘Uthmān
Ndiaye, whose work was entitled Sawārim al-╔aqq, and from ‘Alī Cisse,
whose work was entitled Mikhzam li Abā╙il A╕mad Dem. For the specifics of
this debate, see chapter three (“Seeing God”) of Seesemann’s Divine Flood. I
am indebted to Seesemann for providing me an advance copy of this and
other chapters.
xiv THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
The book has immediate relevance to some of the more
contentious issues that confront Muslims of our own age: the
orthodoxy of Sufism and its practices, the untenability of
continued racial and cultural prejudices, the nature of
religious authority and the ethics of disagreement between
Muslims. Followers of Shaykh Ibrāhīm will no doubt see little
coincidence in the fact the Kāshif mounts a comprehensive
defense of Sufism and tolerant Sunni mainstream orthodoxy
decades before the fractious tentacles of extremist,
excommunicative movements had so deeply permeated
Muslim communities around the world.
Conventions of writing change with the times, and Sufi
literature is no exception. That roughly half of the Kāshif
consists of citations from prior works should not surprise one
familiar with the development of the genre of Islamic
scholarly prose since the eighteenth-century. The source
analyses conducted on important Sufi works in the region
immediately prior to the Kāshif – on Ibn Mubarak al-Lama╙ī’s
Ibrīz (written 1719, Morocco) and ‘Umar al-Futi Tal’s Rimā╕
(written 1844, Senegal) by Bernd Radtke,7 and on Mālik Sy’s
If╕ām al-Munkir al-Jānī (written 1921, Senegal) by Ravane
Mbaye8 – permit a useful comparison to Shaykh Ibrāhīm’s
citation from previous sources. According to Radtke, the Ibrīz
contains 270 citations from 139 different books, with most
sources used not more than once or twice. The Rimā╕ contains
about 640 citations from 123 sources, with most citations (two-

7. Bernd Radtke, “Ibriziana: Themes and Sources of a Seminal Sufi Work,”
Sudanic Africa, 7 (1996); and Ratke, “Studies on the Sources of the Kitab
Rimah Hizb al-Rahim of al-hajj ‘Umar, 6 (1995).
8. Ravane Mbaye, Le Grand Savant El Hadji Malick Sy, Pensée et Action, tome
troisième: Ifham al-Munkir al-Jani, Réduction au silence du dénégateur (Beirut:
Dar Albouraq, 2003).
Background to the Text xv
thirds) coming from nine authors (with eighteen to ninetyeight citations from each). Mbaye did not keep track of the
number of citations in the If╕ām, but he estimates more than
200 sources, 9 while six works are cited more frequently
(between four and thirty citations from each). In the Kāshif,
Shaykh Ibrāhīm uses 271 citations from 112 different works.
There are eighteen works which Shaykh Ibrāhīm cites more
frequently: from between four and seventeen times each.
A closer look at the main sources used in each of the three
seminal Tijānī works – the Rimā╕, the If╕ām and the Kāshif –
reveal a diverse source base for Tijānī writers in West Africa.
Of the main sources listed by Radtke for al-╔ājj ‘Umar, Mbaye
for al-╔ājj Mālik and ourselves for Shaykh Ibrāhīm, the only
work cited more than four times by all three writers is the
primary text of the Tijāniyya: ‘Alī Harāzim al-Barāda’s Jawāhir
al-Ma’ānī. Shaykh Ibrāhīm shares al-╔ājj ‘Umar’s frequent
recourse to the works of ‘Abd al-Wahhāb al-Sha’rānī (d. 1565,
Egypt), A╕mad Zarrūq (d. 1493, Libya), Ibn ‘A╙ā-Allah (d.
1309, Alexandria), and of Ibn Mubārak al-Lama╙ī’s Ibrīz.
Shaykh Ibrāhīm also shares al-╔ājj Mālik’s predilection for the
nineteenth-century Moroccan Tijānī scholar Ibn al-Sā’i╕’s
Bughyat al-Mustafīd and the eighteenth-century Turkish Sufi
exegete Isma’īl al-Haqqī’s Rū╕ al-Bayān. To this list of
distinguished Sufi writers, Shaykh Ibrāhīm adds frequent use
(four or more citations each) of the writings of the Malian

9. This number may be inflated, as an examination of Mbaye’s “Index of
works cited” for the If╕ām reveals that Mbaye neglects to distinguish
between works cited by Sy directly and works referenced by authors whom
Sy cites. For example, Shaykh Ibrāhīm Niasse may cite from al-Sha’rānī, who
in turn cites from a work of Ibn al-‘Arabī. In such a case, our list of the
sources in the Kāshif would not include the work of Ibn al-‘Arabī, only the
work of al-Sha’rānī.
xvi THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Qādirī Shaykh Mukhtār Kuntī (d. 1811), Ibn al-‘Arabī al-
╔ātimī, Abū ╔amīd al-Ghazālī (d. 1111, Baghdad), the
Moroccan Shādhilī scholar Ibn ‘Ajība (d. 1809), the Moroccan
Tijānī Shaykh A╕mad Sukayrij (d. 1949), the Persian Sufi alQusharyī (d. 1072), the Indian scholar A╕mad al-╖āwī (d.
1825), the Mauritanian Shādhilī master Muhammad al-Yadālī
(d. 1753), and the writings of al-╔ājj ‘Umar himself.
The Kāshif thus presents a masterful weaving together of
the writings of past Sufi masters. This format was of course
not lost on Shaykh Ibrāhīm himself, who describes his own
work as one that “collects the cream of the books authored on
this discipline (of Sufism).” It was a style well received by his
contemporaries. In the section of commendation of the Kāshif,
left un-translated in the present work, Shaykh Ibrāhīm
includes the praise poetry of a number of scholars from
Mauritania associated with the heritage of Muhammad al-
╔āfi╛ al-Shinqītī (d. 1830) , who first introduced the Tijāniyya
south of the Sahara. The Shaykh writes:
I have presented my work entitled Kāshif al-Ilbās to a community
among the people of my age, the people of explanation (╕all),
joining (‘aqd) and scholarly criticism in the sciences of the Sacred
Law and the Divine Reality. They are the masters of creation and
leaders of the distinguished folk of the Sufi Path. All of them,
praise be to Allah, praised me for this work and wrote a
commendation. So I wanted to include here their
commendations and testimonies in order that the fair-minded
person would know that this book contains nothing other than a
collection (jam’), so the words in it are the words of the scholars
(‘ulamā’), and the doctrine on which it is built is the doctrine of
the bosom-friends.
This ability to gather the knowledge of the prior scholars
was thus considered an important testimony to a shaykh’s
Background to the Text xvii
scholarly credentials. Certainly the work played a role in the
submission of many within the Idaw ‘Alī scholarly tribe to
Shaykh Ibrāhīm beginning in the 1930s. It is likewise related
that when Shaykh Ibrāhīm first visited Nigeria in 1945, he took
with him four copies of the Kāshif, which he left with the
‘ulamā’ in the city of Kano, one of the most renowned centers
of Muslim scholarship in all of Africa. After reading the book,
the Kano scholars testified that such a work gathering so much
knowledge together in one place was an occurrence they
thought relegated to the scholars of Islam’s golden ages.10
This is not to say that the Kāshif contains nothing original.
In his analysis of the sources for al-╔ājj ‘Umar’s Rimā╕, Radtke
rightly draws the reader’s attention away from the fact the
author incorporates so many other sources, focusing instead
on how the author uses his sources. The Kāshif of course also
does contain a good deal of the author’s own prose and
poetry. But the methodology the Shaykh uses in citing from
other works deserves a closer look. Generally speaking,
Shaykh Ibrāhīm presents a series of citations on a given
subject, usually interspersed with his own comments. He
concludes by including what Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī (d.
1815), the founder of the Tijāniyya Sufi order, has himself said
concerning the subject in question. The significance of this

10. Interview with Shaykh Tijānī ‘Alī Cisse, Medina-Kaolack, Senegal, June,
2009. Rüdiger Seesemann reports a similar version of events from Barham
Diop, the traveling companion of Shaykh Ibrāhīm: “On his departure from
Kano, Shaykh Ibrāhīm left behind a few copies of Kāshif al-Ilbās. Later the
book found its way into the hands of a few religious scholars, who assumed
that the author had lived in Senegal a long time ago—until ‘Alī Cissé and
Abu Bakr Serigne Mbaye (Niasse) made a stopover in Kano on their way to
the Hijaz. The scholars of Kano were stunned by their visitors: ‘Where are
you from?’ – ‘Senegal.’ Then the scholars asked whether they had heard
about a saint called Ibrāhīm Niasse, who had lived in Senegal a long time
ago. ‘He is alive, he is still in Senegal. This is his brother.’”
xviii THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
straight-forward approach should not go unnoticed. In fact,
Shaykh Ibrāhīm says in the text: “Whoever examines it (the
Kāshif) closely and judges it fairly will know for certain that
this compilation was authored by Shaykh al-Tijānī with his
own hand.” The guiding spiritual presence of Shaykh A╕mad
al-Tijānī aside, Shaykh Ibrāhīm’s methodology in selecting
and ordering citations seems to have been consciously aimed
at demonstrating the dialectic between the Tijāniyya and prior
Sufi traditions, thereby giving fresh perspective to Shaykh alTijānī’s own words. Moreover, Shaykh Ibrāhīm hoped that
such fresh perspective would benefit and unite his Tijānī
readership, praying in the book’s conclusion that Allah would
“make it a source of discernment for the Spiritual Path and its
people, stringing them together (like pearls) in the company of
the Noble Seal (al-Tijānī).”
The claim that Shaykh al-Tijānī is the real author of the
Kāshif of course has broader implications than just putting the
Shaykh’s words in dialogue with other Sufi traditions. In fact,
the Kāshif, like many other Sufi texts, has developed its own
reputation for saintly blessing (baraka) simply as a physical
object. Shaykh Ibrāhīm writes: “May Allah put tremendous
blessing (baraka) in it, to the extent that it may bless any place
it is found.” Today, many followers of Shaykh Ibrāhīm carry
the book with them when they travel just to have the blessing
of it in their possession wherever they go.11
Whatever blessing is said to endow a particular work, the
reader of any Sufi text should not forget the suspicion with
which Sufis have generally treated writing. “Secrets are in the
hearts of the distinguished folk (rijāl), not in the bellies of

11. Interview with Shaykh Tijānī ‘Alī Cisse, Medina-Kaolack, Senegal, June,
2009.
Background to the Text xix
books,” Shaykh Ibrāhīm Niasse was fond of saying.12 Indeed,
very particular circumstances inspire a Sufi master such as
Shaykh Ibrāhīm to write in the first place, and most Sufi
shaykhs left no writing at all. The purpose of Sufi texts is to
respond to particular issues at hand, not to serve as the means
of actually transmitting the knowledge of God or the means of
purifying the ego-self (nafs). These essential aims of Sufism are
meant to be transmitted from spiritual master to disciple in the
absence of texts. The Kāshif was written to make space for the
emergence of the Tijānī Flood, not to actually initiate aspirants
into the knowledge of God brought by this Flood. Shaykh
Ibrāhīm writes of the experiential knowledge communicated
by the science of Sufism: “It cannot be acquired through
talking or written texts, but can only be received directly from
the people of spiritual experience (ahl al-adhwāq).”
Zachary Wright
Medina-Baye, Kaolack, Senegal
June, 2009 (Rajab, 1430)

12. Interview with Shaykh ╔asan Cisse, Lagos, Nigeria, February, 2006.
xxi
Note on Translation
his translation is based on the most recent Arabic
publication of the Kāshif al-Ilbās, edited by Shaykh
Tijānī b. ‘Alī Cisse (Cairo: al-Sharkat al-Dawliyya lī al-
╘ibā’a, 2001). There are several reasons for using this
particular printing over earlier publications of the work
(beginning in 1951). Shaykh Tijānī Cisse’s 2001 edition is much
more than a reprinting of earlier publications. It is based on
the earliest available manuscripts of the original text.
Moreover, Shaykh Tijānī conducted an extensive analysis of
the Prophetic traditions cited by Shaykh Ibrāhīm Niasse. It is
related that one scholar of Azhar (Egypt), upon seeing the
work of Shaykh Tijānī in this regard, remarked that this effort
alone would have been enough for a Ph.D. in ╔adīth studies
from that prestigious institution.
Shaykh Tijānī’s footnotes to the 2001 Arabic edition include
chapter and page number references to specific collections of
╔adīth, as well as alternative narrations of the tradition in
question. Unfortunately, this translation cannot hope to
reproduce this extensive technical analysis of the Prophetic
traditions cited in the text, but we have made use of his work to
indicate the general source of the ╔adīth in question.
T
xxii THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
We also have made every attempt to identify authors and
texts cited by Shaykh Ibrāhīm. The Arabic text assumes a
degree of familiarity with the Islamic scholarly tradition that
cannot be taken for granted among an English readership. For
works or personalities which Shaykh Ibrāhīm mentions more
than once, only the first reference is footnoted. Otherwise, a
reference list of sources is available at the end of this book: the
reader is encouraged to return there should he/she forget a
reference that has already been mentioned. The same is true
for Arabic words which appear in the translation: a glossary of
Arabic terms is included in the back should the reader be
unable recall an Arabic word earlier defined.
Knowledge of the Arabic language is not sufficient to
translate a work of this kind. This translation benefits from the
knowledgeable shaykhs who continue to teach and transmit
the Kāshif al-Ilbās to committed students. In many cases,
knowledge of the context of the text is indispensible to
understanding the Arabic itself. An immediate example is the
translation of the book’s title. Although ilbās literally translates
as “clothing” or “garbing”, the meaning intended by Shaykh
Ibrāhīm, as many scholars confirm, was actually iltibās,
meaning “confusion” or “ambiguity.”
As scholars of linguistics have concluded, there is no such
thing as an authoritative translation: every translation is but
an interpretation made by the translator. In many cases,
Shaykh Ibrāhīm quotes from works that have already been
translated into English. Just as we have translated these
passages independently of previous translations, qualified
independent or alternative translations of the Kāshif to the one
found here can only add to a more complete portrait of the
author’s original meaning.
xxiii
Biography of Authors
Shaykh Ibrāhīm Niasse (b. 1900, Tayba Niassene, Senegal; d.
1975, London)
The “Bringer of the Tijānī Flood” (╖ā╕ib al-Fay╓a alTijāniyya), Shaykh Ibrāhīm became widely recognized as
one the preeminent Muslim scholars and the leading
authority of the Tijāniyya Sufi order of his age. He traveled
widely, becoming known as “Shaykh al-Islām” for his
comprehensive mastery of the Islamic sciences. He had
unprecedented success in spreading Islam and the
Tijāniyya on the African continent.
Sayyid ‘Alī Cisse (b. 1906, Diossong, Senegal; d. 1982, MedinaBaye Kaolack, Senegal)
Sayyid ‘Alī, a descendent of one of the oldest scholarly
families in West Africa, became the closest disciple and
spiritual inheritor (khalīfa) of Shaykh Ibrāhīm. He wrote
several books besides the tarjama (biography) of the
Shaykh in the beginning of the Kāshif. He married Shaykh
Ibrāhīm’s eldest daughter, Fā╙ima Zahra Niasse; and their
sons have since emerged as some of the primary
spokesmen for the following of Shaykh Ibrāhīm.
xxiv THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Shaykh ╔asan Cisse (b. 1945, Medina-Baye Kaolack; d. 2008,
Medina-Baye Kaolack)
The Imam designated by Shaykh Ibrāhīm to succeed
Sayyid ‘Alī, Shaykh ╔asan became the preeminent
representative of the “Tijānī Flood” in recent years. He
spread Islam and the Tijāniyya in America and South
Africa and numerous other lands. He founded a
humanitarian NGO, the African American Islamic Institute
(AAII), promoting cultural exchange and fulfilling the
educational and health-care needs of those in need. He
studied in Senegal, Mauritania and Egypt, and was
awarded an honorary doctorate from Azhar University in
Cairo.
Shaykh Tijānī Cisse (b. 1955, Medina-Baye Kaolack)
The second son of Sayyid ‘Alī Cisse and Fā╙ima Zahra
Niasse, Shaykh Tijānī (also spelled Cheikh Tidiane)
succeeded his elder brother as the Imam of the Grand
Mosque in Medina-Baye and President of the AAII in 2008.
As a student at Azhar University, he specialized in ╔adīth
studies. He has since edited and printed many books of
Shaykh Ibrāhīm and other Tijānī scholars. Shaykh Tijānī
was the last student taught by Shaykh Ibrāhīm, the last to
receive unlimited authorization in the Islamic sciences
(ijāza mu╙laqa) from his father Sayyid ‘Alī, and the closest
companion of Shaykh ╔asan.
Zachary Wright
A graduate student in African History at Northwestern
University (Chicago), Zachary is also the author of On the
Path of the Prophet: Shaykh Ahmad Tijani and the Tariqa
Muhammadiyya (AAII Publishing, 2005). He has been
Biography of Authors xxv
blessed to maintain close contact with the community of
Shaykh Ibrāhīm Niasse for the last twelve years, and to
have studied with Shaykh ╔asan and Shaykh Tijānī Cisse.
Muhtar Holland
Muhtar Holland has published numerous works and
translations, the most recent being a translation of Imam
al-Tirmidhī’s al-Shamā’il (Fons Vitae & Muslim Literary
Society, forthcoming). He has worked as Senior Research
Fellow at the Islamic Foundation in England and the
Director of the Nur al-Islam Translation Center in New
York.
Abdullahi El-Okene
Abdullahi El-Okene is a professor of Engineering at
Ahmadu Bello University in Zaria, Nigeria. He received
his instruction in the Islamic sciences in Nigeria, and later
spent a good deal of time in the companionship of Shaykh
╔asan Cisse, being entrusted by him with several ArabicEnglish translation projects. He is the Chairman of the
International Organization of the Tijaniyyah Brotherhood
based in Nigeria, and several other Islamic organizations.
xxvii
Arabic Transliteration Key
Arabic letter Transliteration Phonetic equivalent
ا ā talk
ب b boy
ت t table
ث th bath
ج j joy
 - ╕ ح
 - kh خ
د d day
ذ dh then
ر r run
ز z zebra
س s sun
ش sh shine
 - ╗ ص
 - ╓ ض
 - ╙ ط
xxviii THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
 - ╛ ظ
 - ’ ع
 - gh غ
ف f feast
 - q ق
ك k key
ل l love
م m mother
ن n none
: h health
و w/ū weather/food
ي y/ī yes/street
ء) ‘ glottal stop)
ة -/t (silent)/hat
َ a bag
ِ i big
ُ u bug
xxix
Introduction to the 2001 Arabic
Edition by Shaykh ╔asan Cisse
In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful
raise be to Allah, the First, the Last, the Manifest, the
Hidden; Who said, “Will they not meditate on the
Qur’ān, or are there locks on their hearts?” (Qur’ān,
47:24). And He said, “He gives wisdom to whomsoever He
pleases; and whoever is given wisdom, has truly been given
abundant good” (2:269). What passes the lips derives merely
from the throat, and above every scholar is somebody more
knowledgeable.
Blessings and Peace on the Radiant Light, the Lightning
Flash, the Fountainhead of Divine Effulgence; he who has
acquired Allah’s Magnificent Light, our Master Mu╕ammad,
the Opener of what was closed, the Seal of what has passed,
the Helper of Truth by the Truth, the Guide to Your Straight
Path, and on his family, may this prayer be equal to his worth,
and to the greatness of his extent in space and time. It was he
! who said, “Relate from me, even if one verse.” And he said,
“Let the one present inform the one absent, for perhaps the
P
xxx THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
one informed (in my absence) will comprehend more than the
one hearing (directly from me).”
The subject of Sufism is bound inextricably to Allah. It
begins with Him, ends with Him and returns to Him, may He
be Glorified and Exalted. The Sufis are the elite of Allah’s
servants. They are the guardians of His religion and His
community, the ones upholding His Book and His Sacred Law
in every time and every place. Their words, their actions, their
movements and rest, their knowledge, their overflowing
bounties, their righteous deeds and their spiritual stations are
all for the sake of Allah and to Him do they return. Allah,
Glorified and Exalted is He, is their Trainer, their Teacher,
their Guide and their Director to the balanced, straight path. It
is this Divine connection in which all of them are found: joined
in earnestness, love, intimacy, proximity and absorption in the
Divine Essence of Allah, Holy and Exalted is He. The Sufi has
become the Qur’ānic verse, “Wheresoever you turn is the
Countenance of Allah” (2:115): not seeing anything except
Him. It has been said, “Sufism is when the Real makes you die
to yourself, and brings you back to life because of Him.” Once
our master, teacher and patron, Abū al-‘Abbās al-Tijānī !, was
asked about the true nature of Sufism. He responded, “Know
that Sufism is obeying the commands and avoiding the
prohibitions, externally and internally, in a way that pleases
Him, not in a way that pleases you.”
We are not here today for the purpose of defending the
Sufis. Allah is the One defending them. He, may He be praised
and exalted, said: “Surely Allah is the Defender of those who
believe” (22:38). The defense of the Sufis is thus to remain
innocent of anything that contravenes the Sacred Law. Then
they become worthy of the statement of Shaykh A╕mad Tijānī:
Introduction to the 2001 Arabic Edition
xxxi
xxxi
“If you hear something related from me, weigh it on the scale
of the Sacred Law. What balances, take it; what does not, leave
it.” What can be added to the truth but misguidance? So we
invite the weighing of the entirety of the Shaykh's companions
and beloved ones, both the common folk and the elite, on this
scale.
What great, glad tidings is this reprinting of the book, The
Removal of Confusion concerning the Flood of the Saintly Seal
A╕mad al-Tijānī, after a complete redaction from its original
manuscript. In truth, this book deserves to be inscribed in
golden ink due to what is contained herein by way of religious
sciences, secrets, overflowing bounties and illuminations. May
Allah be well-pleased with the author, for by this summary he
has brought benefit to the servants in all lands. He has
collected in this work everything that had been separated and
dispersed in previous books of the Sufis. Indeed, he has
gathered the cream of these works concerning the science of
Sufism. The author said that whoever examines this book
closely, and with fairness, will know for certain that this work
was in actuality authored by Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī himself.
May Allah be pleased with him, and allow us to benefit from
him.
Before concluding, I wish to thank my dear brother, the
distinguished master, Shaykh al-Tijānī ‘Alī Cisse, who
expended great effort to accomplish this pious work and
praiseworthy endeavor. He reprinted this book after a
complete redaction. He also identified the Prophetic traditions
cited in the work using the great ╔adīth collections of Imam
al-Bukhārī, Muslim, Tirmidhi, Abū Dāwūd, Ibn Mājah, alNasā’ī, and others. In all, the sources for this work of his
xxxii THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
include more than thirty collections of Prophetic traditions,
such as the commentary on (al-Ghazālī’s) I╕yā’ ‘Ulūm al-Dīn,
(Murta╓a al-Zabīdī’s) Itti╕āf al-Sādat al-Muttaqīn. This work
facilitates the accomplished reader to find the relevant ╔adīth
himself or an alternative narration.
Allah is the Guarantor of success. We ask Him, Glorious
and Exalted is He, to purify this work for the sake of His
Noble Countenance. May He regard it with pleasure and
acceptance, and may it be an acceptable service (khidma) for
our honorable patron, shaykh and means of access to Allah,
the Shaykh of Islam and spiritual guide for humanity, the pole
of right guidance and succor of the servants, Shaykh Ibrāhīm
b. al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah al-Tijānī. May Allah be pleased with him
and his father, Amen. Surely He is the One Who Hears, the
Close, the One Who Answers prayers.
xxxiii
Biography of the Author, Shaykh
Ibrāhīm Niasse
By Shaykh ‘Alī b. Sayyid al-╔asan Cisse
n the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful.
May Allah bestow blessings upon the secret of the Divine
Essence, he through whom the Divine Names and
Attributes are elucidated, our master Mu╕ammad, the best of
creation. And on his family and companions, may Allah grant
fountains of grace (fa╓l) and overflowing bounties (fuyū╓āt).
This is only a small portion of the author’s biography, may
Allah be pleased with him.
He is a Shaykh in all the degrees and ramifications of the
rank. He is the mouthpiece of his time, the light of his age,
unique of his kind, the focus of Allah’s attention among His
creation. He is the open doorway for anyone who wishes to
enter the Holy Presence. The age knows no equal in
knowledge and religious piety. He is the Shaykh for the
training of spiritual aspirants, the repository of learning for
the rightly-guided, and the seal of those who have attained
certain knowledge (al-mu╕aqqiqīn) in the fourteenth century of
the Islamic era. He is the splendor of the nights and the days.
I
xxxiv THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
He is the authorative source (╕ujja) of the distinguished
gnostics (al-‘ārifīn), the blazing pride of the Mu╕ammadan
community. He is the champion the ╘arīqa A╕madiyya
Ibrāhīmiyya Hanīfiyya (Tijāniyya), for he is the elite of its
most distinguished men. He is the rising sun of the religious
and gnostic sciences, the confluence of discernment, insight
and gnosis. He is the impregnable fortress, the lofty mountain
cave. He is the pearl in the crown worn by the noble
champions of Truth. He bears the precious necklace from the
saintly poles (aq╙āb); he lifts the flag of noble virtues among the
human race. He brings together the knowledge of the previous
scholars: knowledge which had been dispersed and separated,
from after the foundation of this Muslim community until
recent times. He is endowed with a beautiful, pleasant
character, and with the sanctified qualities of the Prophet
Mu╕ammad !.
From the favor from the Most Bountifully Generous (alKarīm), the Ever-Giving (al-Wahhāb), he mastered the sacred
sciences and the gnostic understandings of the Compassionate
Lord to a degree impossible to describe by even the most
eloquent and profuse tongue. He has no like and no equal in
the present or the future. By means of the Mu╕ammadan
inheritance and the spiritual training of the Seal of Saints,
A╕mad Tijānī, he ascended the peaks of honor, purity and
perfection. He became coroneted with crowns of resplendent
jewels. He is possessed of subtle instruction, weighty
knowledge and precise explanations.
This is our Shaykh, our means of access to Allah, the
incomparable saintly pole, the great preeminent gnostic sage,
Shaykh Ibrāhīm b. al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah al-Tijānī b. Sayyid
Mu╕ammad b. Madamba b. Bakr b. Mu╕ammad al-Amin b.
Biography of the Author, Shaykh Ibrahim Niasse
xxxv
xxxv
Samba b. al-Rida. May Allah be well pleased with them all,
and may He enable us and our loved ones to benefit by him.
Amen.
Upbringing of the Shaykh
He was born after the afternoon prayer on Thursday, in the
middle of Rajab in the year 1320 (A.H.),1 in ╘ayba, a village
built by his father !. The fact that this Imam, the BosomFriend (al-Khalīl)2 of majestic prestige, was born in ╘ayba –
which means “delightful goodness” – is sufficient proof for the
appropriateness of the town’s name.
He grew up in the custody of his father, modeling his
decency, righteousness, devoutness, valor, chastity, propriety
and piety. He studied the Qur’ān under his father and
memorized it perfectly in Warsh-style of recitation as taught by
Imam Nāfi’.3 It is reported that he was eager to be of service as
an adolescent, and signs of nobility had already become
apparent in him in his youth.
After memorizing the Qur’ān, he devoted himself
earnestly to the study of the formal Islamic sciences in both

1. Corresponding to October 17, 1902. The actual year of the Shaykh’s birth
was 1318 (November 8, 1900), according to a note the Shaykh himself wrote
(1934-5). The note is cited in Mu╕ammad b. Iktush, Min Akhbār al-Shaykh
Ibrāhīm (p. 26); a copy of the original is also in the possession of Rüdiger
Seesemann.
2. Al-Khalīl is the name Islamic tradition gives to Prophet Ibrāhīm.
3. According to ╔adīth, the Qur’ān has seven different styles of reading
(╖a╕ī╕ al-Bukhārī), the two most famous being Hafs and Warsh. Warsh reciters
trace their school through Imam Nāfi’, a teacher of Qur’ān recitation (tajwīd)
in Medina, Arabia. His student, Abū Sa’īd ‘Uthmān b. Sa’īd al-Misri (d.
197/812), nicknamed “Warsh” because of his light complexion, brought the
style of recitation to Egypt. The Warsh style remains the most common
recitation in North and West Africa.
xxxvi THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
their literal and implied meanings. He succeeded in acquiring
knowledge and understanding, reaching the desired goals and
purpose. Indeed, he learned the sciences exhaustively and
mastered all their disciplines, distinguishing himself in a very
short period of time. So Allah appointed him as a mercy for
His servants and as a benefit for both the ancestors and the
contemporaries.
In all of this, his education was personally undertaken by
his father, a man of famous reputation and firmly established
qualifications. Praise to Allah, he received from him the
precious gems of beneficial learning, the gifts of the secrets
(asrār), the remembrances (adhkār) and the Sacred Law
(sharī’a).
Then Allah granted him complete spiritual illumination
(fat╕), presenting him with sciences bestowed by Divine grace.
So he excelled in them as well. He did not study these sciences
under any human being: he was taught only by the One who
is All-Knowing, by means of Divine inspiration (ilhām). He
remained unceasingly devoted to the acquisition and
provision of beneficial knowledge, until many seekers of
sacred learning were attracted to him. Students derived
benefit from his school (madrasa), and righteous erudite
scholars received training at his hand, as evidenced and
confirmed by the people of discernment and perception. His
blessing thus spread to all the brethren, and his degree was
exalted above all peers.
Affiliation with the Tijāniyya Sufi Path
He received the ╘arīqa Tijāniyya from the unique figure of his
epoch, the proof of the people of his era, the copious well of
Tijānī litanies (awrād) and secrets, and the assembly point of its
Biography of the Author, Shaykh Ibrahim Niasse
xxxvii
xxxvii
lights and remembrances (adhkār): his Shaykh and father, the
erudite scholar, the wise exemplar, the undoubted deputy
(khalīfa) of Shaykh al-Tijānī and the bearer of his flag in the
western lands, al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah b. Sayyid Mu╕ammad. He
was indeed the Shaykh, the Imam, one of the eminent saints,
who combined in his person the Sacred Law (sharī’a) and
Divine Reality (╕aqīqa) and so became the guide of the Sufi
way. May the Most Generous Lord never cease exalting him to
the most praise-worthy station (al-maqām al-a╕mad).
After receiving the Tariqa, a great yearning entered the
young Shaykh's perfected, lofty, serene and well-pleasing
soul.4 His lofty spiritual aspiration (himma) was awakened
anew, and with such force that it would have demolished the
unshakable mountains had it been directed towards them. It
led him to harvest the fruits of Divine sciences (al-‘ulūm al-
╕aqqaniyya), heavenly experiences (al-adhwāq al-malakūtiyya)
and angelic secrets (al-asrār al-jabarūtiyya), to a point where no
one before or after him could aspire. How splendid are these
verses of the eloquent orator, erudite scholar and excellent
poet, in which he eulogizes this Shaykh:
The famous pole (qu╙b) of the Tijāniyya, its crown and Imam
And his predecesors were (also) its crowns.
Owner of the highest rank, unreachable
By the gnostics, whatever the exalted nature of their gnosis.
By him, the Sacred Law has had its reputation enhanced
By him the Divine Reality has had its stature elevated.

4. Shaykh ‘Alī Cisse’s use of words such as al-nafs al-kamila and al-nafs almar╓iya convey the meaning that Shaykh Ibrāhīm had at this early stage
completed the purification of the soul (tazkiyat al-nafs) central in Sufi
doctrine.
xxxviii THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
But for him, both of them would have been barren shells
Their pillars in ruins.
So he then embarked on the task of benefitting the people
with the sciences of Divine bestowal and experiential
knowledge of the Lord. He devoted himself to this task
morning and evening, day and night.
Knowledge and Character
As for his grasp of the Qur’ān and the Sunnah, his good
manners, education, guidance, linguistic fluency, eloquence
and proficiency, he feasted on these sciences and monopolized
them. Trying to match his mastery of them would be like
sitting down the uninvited guest at his table while he dined.
The learned and cultured men of his time, near and far,
testified to his learning. When he spoke, the eloquent Arabs
would fall on their knees in front of him, raising their heads
and lending him their ears. He commanded all the sciences,
both transmitted and rationally deduced. He would decipher
their meanings as he saw fit, extracting the pearls from their
treasure-troves on the spur of the moment. As for his
knowledge of the Divine realities (al-╕aqā’iq al-rabbāniya), the
sacred gnostic sciences (al-ma’ārif al-qudsiyya) and the spiritual
states pertaining to the Essential Being (al-a╕wāl al-Dhātiyya):
he was their standard-bearer, the key to their doors, their
beacon (mishkāt), their lamp (mi╗bā╕) and their lantern (zujāja).5

5. The reference here is to the Qur’ān (24:35), “Allah is the Light of the
heavens and the earth. The similitude of His Light is as a niche (mishkāt),
wherein is a lamp (mi╗bā╕). The lamp in a glass (zujāja), the glass, is as it
were a glittering star…” Mishkāt is here translated as “beacon” to reflect
what most Qur’ān interpreters understand to mean the place a lamp is
placed whereby it gives off more light (for which “niche” is only a partial
translation). See Edward Lane, Arabic Lexicon, p. 1590.
Biography of the Author, Shaykh Ibrahim Niasse
xxxix
xxxix
He was copiously endowed with excellent merits and
virtues. Neither the pen nor the tongue can describe the extent
of such glorious qualities or the abundance of his benefit for
his Lord’s creatures. From his bounty, good conduct and
generosity, he tenderly provided for those in need, like a
mother nursing her child; continuously struggling to please
the Kind and Beneficent Lord. Those whom he nurtured
attained (spiritual) maturity always in love of his nurturing.
So his reputation soared and his mention spread to the farthest
horizons.
The triumphant banner of virtue was firmly planted at his
feet, without dispute or dissension. In every single moment,
he never ceased bestowing moral excellence, blessings and the
overflowing surplus of his bounty. His grace, noble generosity
and beneficence were showered everywhere. His excellent
qualities are beyond enumeration, and no record could
contain a complete list of his merits even if all the world’s pens
were used until they snapped on their scrolls.
Writings
As for the excellence of his poetry and prose, his mastery of
the skills of rhetoric and explanation, and his eloquent use of
the pen and the tongue, Sa╕bān and ╔assān could not have
matched him! 6 He is the author of numerous literary
compositions, as well as many reports, informative responses
and useful notes, in which he reconciles the differences in the

6. Sa╕ban and ╔assān were famous for their eloquence and their eulogies in
the time of the Prophet.
xl THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
texts of the Imams who are reliable sources of guidance. His
literary works include the following:7
Kāshif al-Ilbās ‘an Fay╓at al-Khatm Abī al-‘Abbās (“The Removal
of Confusion concerning the Flood of the Saintly Seal Abū
al-‘Abbās (A╕mad al-Tijānī”).
Masarrat al-Majāmi’ fī Masā’il al-Jāmi’ (“The Charm of
Compositions, concerning the issues relating to the
Congregational Mosque”).
Al-Khamr al-╔alāl: fī mad╕ Sayyid al-Rijāl (“The Lawful Wine, in
praise of the Chieftain of Men”).
Taysīr al-Wu╗ūl ilā ╔a╓rat al-Rasūl (“The Facilitation of
Attainment to the Presence of the Messenger”).
╘īb al-Anfās fī madā’i╕ al-Khatm Abī al-‘Abbās (“The Perfume of
Breaths in praises of the Seal Abū al-‘Abbas”).
Raw╓ al-Mu╕ibbīn fī mad╕ al-‘Ārifīn (“The Garden of the Lovers,
in praise of the Gnostic Sages”).
Al-Nūr al-Rabbānī fī mad╕ al-Sayyid A╕mad al-Tijānī (“The
Divine Light in praise of Sayyid A╕mad al-Tijānī”).
Rū╕ al-Adab limā ╕awā min ╕ikam wa adab (“The Spirit of Good
Morals, and what it contains of wisdom and manners”).
Nūr al-Ba╗ar fī mad╕ Sayyid al-Bashar (“Light of the Eye in
praise of the Master of Humankind”).
Al-Sirr al-Akbar wa al-Kibrīt al-A╕mar (“The Greatest Secret and
the Red Sulfur”).

7. Other important works were written after the date of Shaykh ‘Alī Cisse’s
introduction. For a complete list of Shaykh Ibrāhīm’s writings, see Ousmane
Kane, John Hunwick and Rüdiger Seesemann, "Senegambia I: the Niassene
Tradition," in Hunwick (ed.), Arabic Literature of Africa, volume IV, the writings
of Western Sudanic Africa (Leiden: Brill, 2003), p. 279-301
Biography of the Author, Shaykh Ibrahim Niasse
xli
xli
Tu╕fat al-A╙fāl fī ╕aqā’iq al-af’āl fī al-╗arf (“The Children’s Gift,
concerning the real meanings of verbs in conjugation”).
Al-Fay╓ al-A╕madī fī al-Mawlid al-Mu╕ammadī (“The A╕madan
Bounty concerning the Mu╕ammadan Birthday”).
Tab╗irat al-Anām fī jawāz ru’yat al-Bārī fī al-yaq╛a wa al-manām
(“The Enlightenment of Humanity: concerning the
permissibility of the vision of the Creator while awake or
asleep”).
Rū╕ al-╔ubb fī mad╕ al-Qu╙b (“The Spirit of Love in celebration
of the Saintly Pole”)
Owner of the Flood (Fay╓a)
Allah established him as a spring (manhal) for the spiritual
wayfarers, one who provides hope for the aspirants and
seekers, the help for those in need, the support for the
destitute, and the nourishment for the starving. Allah
endowed him with the Flood (Fay╓a) mentioned by the
Hidden Pole, the renowned Mu╕ammad Seal, our Shaykh and
our assistance, the owner of the effusion (fay╓), our master
A╕mad b. Mu╕ammad al-Tijānī. And this Fay╓a has spread
and continued without interruption, for its occurrence comes
near the End of Time. At his hand, thousands upon thousands
attained to the perfection of experientially-witnessed gnosis
(al-ma’rifa al-‘ayāniyya al-shahūdiyya). Many, both White and
Black, would come to him each day in droves from all regions
of the earth to enter into our ╘arīqa Tijāniyya, the repository of
Divine favor and gifts of gnosis. No one who received from
him this prodigious litany (wird) would ever fail to gain from
xlii THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
it the benefit of Divine aid and access to the realms of gnosis.
As the most excellent poet has written:
O the best of those at whose door is found waiting the excellent
ones;
Their own retinues vie with each other to visit him
Indeed, the success of the creation is found in visiting you
And in neglecting visiting you is its deprivation
By your fragrance the creation achieves (its needs)
And white people have followed the black in visiting you.
You have lightened the drearieness of your disciples’ journey
No longer do they dread its boulders and rocks
You are the Imam, the leader of the way, its physician
The skilled guide of the path, its Luqmān,8 its Sultan
Indeed, you are its Tubba,9 its Caesar,
Its Anūshirwān,10 its Negus,11 and its Khāqān.12
Indeed, in this time, Shaykh Ibrāhīm is the one who carries
the burdens of spiritual training according to the PropheticMu╕ammadan inheritance. It is he who bears the flag of

8. The Prophet Luqmān was attributed with great wisdom. See Qur’ān,
31:12-13.
9. Tubba was the name given to the ancient kings of Arabia based in Yemen.
10. Khusru Anūshirwān (r. 531-579 C.E.) reigned during the golden age of
Sassanian civilization in Persia. He was known as “Anushirwān the Just.”
Under his leadership Persian culture spread to the Far East, and scholars
from around the world came to study at the universities he established.
11. Negus simply means “King” in Amharic and other languages common to
Ethiopia. Islamic tradition tells of a particularly just Negus (named Ashama)
ruling Abyssinia (Ethiopia) at the time of the Prophet Mu╕ammad, who
accepted Muslims fleeing persecution in Mecca and converted to Islam in
secret. When the Negus died, the Prophet led his community in a funeral
prayer for him.
12. Khāqān, also spelled Khakhan or Khagan, the “Khan of Khans” or “Great
Khan,” was a title used by Chinese emperors as well as other peoples of the
Far East.
Biography of the Author, Shaykh Ibrahim Niasse
xliii
xliii
spiritual elevation according to the most praiseworthy
Abrahamic model (al-tarqiyya al-a╕madiyya al-ibrāhīmiyya). He
is the sanctuary of secrets (asrār), spiritual experience (adhwāq),
lights (anwār), states (a╕wāl), stations (maqāmāt), and
manifestations of the Seal of Sainthood (al-tajalliyāt alkhatmiya).
These words should be clear to you, as testimony has been
provided by some of the leading descendents of our
distinguished preeminent shaykhs. These men, who are the
foundation of the Spiritual Path, have come to him in order to
join his company, obtain his guidance, cling to the hem of his
robes, and receive the Tijānī litany (wird). Such noble
descendents include those of Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛,13
al-Sayyid Mu╕amdi, 14 Shaykh Mawlūd Fāl, 15 Shaykh
Mu╕ammad ‘Āl16 and of Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-╔anaf.17

13. Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛ b. al-Mukhtār b. al-Habīb al-Shinqitī (1759-
1830), mentioned in the text as “our Shaykh and our means of access to
Allah … by whose hand the Tariqa has spread in the lands of the far west.”
Shaykh al-╔āfi╛ was of the Idaw ‘Alī people in Mauritania. He visited
Shaykh A╕mad Tijānī in Fes in from 1800-1804/5 and was the first to bring
the Tariqa Tijāniyya into Mauritania, from where it later spread to the rest of
West Africa.
14. Shaykh Mu╕amdi b. Abd-Allah al-‘Alawī (known as “Baddi”) was the
inheritor (khalīfa) and son-in-law of Shaykh Mu╕ammad al- ╔āfi╛ and the
author of his most comprehensive biography, Nuzhat al-Mustam’ wa al-lafiz fi
manaqib al-Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-Hafiz (written in 1832).
15. Shaykh Mawlūd Fāl was initiated into the Tijāniyya by Mu╕ammad al-
╔āfi╛, and later traveled to Fes, Morocco, to have his initiation renewed by
the main zawiya there just after the passing of Shaykh A╕mad Tijānī (1815).
Mawlud Fal traveled widely throughout West Africa and left many
propagators of the Order in regions such as Futa Jallon, Northern Nigeria
and Sudan.
16. Mu╕ammad ‘Āl b. al-Fat╕ was a renowned Tijānī shaykh of the
╔āfi╛iyya legacy. According to Shaykh Tijānī ‘Alī Cisse (interview, Medina
Baye Senegal, October, 2008), Shaykh Ibrāhīm Niasse sent Mu╕ammad ‘Āl to
xliv THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Shaykh Ibrāhīm gave them the best of spiritual trainings
(tarbiya), guided them on the straightest of ways and paths,
and presented them to their Lord in the best of conditions. So
they entered the fortress of His domain, drunk on the wine of
the Divine Presence, extinct to their own existence and
remaining in the world only because of Him. Congratulations
are due to these outstanding masters, and still more
congratulations, since they were related to the shaykhs of this
Shaykh, the magnanimous director, trainer and promoter. Yet
their filial relationship to the previous shaykhs did not prevent
them from reaching the perfect figure of the age. They deserve
congratulations, because it is filial relationship to the shaykhs
that has obstructed and impeded many of our contemporaries,
like others among the people of ancient times.
O Allah! Remove the obstacle from us, and relieve us of
the attachments and impediments, just as You have done for
those You have blessed with understanding, the people of
veracity and certitude. Promote us at all times to the highest
stations of direct knowledge (ma’rifa) of You. Grant every
success to those who join this Shaykh, befriend him and
believe him, or who recognize him, submit to him and do not
disobey him. Let the news be repeated and broadcast in all the
regions of the earth, making it known that he has no peer in
spiritual training (tarbiya) and guiding people toward the
Sublime Sacred Presence.
Time swore that it would surely bring us the like of him.
You have falsified your oath, O Time, so make amends!

Shaykh A╕mad Sukayrij when the latter requested someone who could
write Arabic very well.
17. Mu╕ammad al-Hanaf was also a prominent Tijānī shaykh of the Idaw
‘Alī people in nineteenth-century Mauritania. His grandson became Shaykh
Ibrāhīm’s follower.
Biography of the Author, Shaykh Ibrahim Niasse
xlv
xlv
How excellent is the one who said in praise of him:
A Shaykh, who when he gives spiritual instruction, is as A╕mad
And if he should speak, it is only with the greatest intelligence
and prudence.
The following verses were composed in his honor by his
brother-in-spirit and his brother-by-birth, the meticulous
erudite scholar and brilliant poet, the knowledgeable one of
Allah, al-╔ājj Mu╕ammad Zaynab,18 the son of Shaykh al-╔ājj
‘Abd-Allah !.
You must know that the Imam has provided
A copious flood (fay╓) of that which benefits the servants,
At the hands of the intermediary to (Shaykh A╕mad) al-Tijānī,
In showers filled with radiant lights and knowledge.
So any one among you who loves his Lord
Will find him pleasing as a Shaykh, quenching your thirst in his
river.
Loving one’s Lord is evidenced by loving him
And hatred of Him is likewise evidenced by hating him.
He inherited the secret of our Shaykh al-Tijānī
From his ancestor, the best of the people of ‘Adnān.
19
He renewed the religion soon after it had fallen into oblivion,
As well as the Sunnah of the Chosen One among the people of
Mu╓ar.20

18. Mu╕ammad Zaynab was considered one of the most knowledgeable of
the community around al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah, training many of Shaykh
Ibrāhīm’s early followers in the classical Islamic sciences.
19. ‘Adnān was a descendent of Prophet Isma’il through his son Kedar. The
Banū, or tribe or people, of ‘Adnān are the ‘Adnāni Arabs tracing descent
through Prophet Ibrāhīm. The “best of the Banū ‘Adnān” refers to the
Prophet Mu╕ammad.
xlvi THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
He repaired the Path of our Shaykh al-Tijānī
In our country, when the structures had collapsed.
He restored the Path of our Hidden Shaykh,
After it had been sold for properties and chattels.
He rebuilt each part of the Path’s edifice that had fallen into
disrepair
Which had floundered in desolation, like knowledge of the
classical sciences.
Allah appointed him for the benefit of His creatures,
And he has banished every deadly peril with the truth.
And the Poet continued:
You must be utterly devoted to him if you seek him,
And you must abandon every distraction altogether.
Indeed the chains of transmission (salāsil) from the Shaykhs
Have been superseded by him, together with the snares.
He has provided spiritual training for the aspirant in a beautiful
manner
Similar to our Shaykh al-Tijānī, the giver of gracious favors.
By him the eyes of the sleepers have been awakened;
And by him the hearts of the heedless have been enlightened.
In every affair, the Imam has based his actions
On the Remembrance (dhikr)21 and the Sunnah
So you must surrender to him, O Shaykhs of the age;
Unless you have reverted to the utmost state of detestation.
Because in esoteric knowledge he is an Ibrāhīm;
A prodigious expert in this Spiritual Path.

20. The Banū Mu╓ar, one of two branches of the Adanite tribe of Northern
Arabia, trace descent from Mudar, who descended from Ni╛ār, a son of
‘Adnān.
21. Here meaning the Qur’ān.
Biography of the Author, Shaykh Ibrahim Niasse
xlvii
xlvii
We therefore bear witness to his superiority;
For we are among his children in respect (to knowledge) of the
Truth.
And the Poet continued:
In his presence, O seeker, you will surely be educated well
He will provide you with useful instruction.
Often he has trained shaykhs who had deviated
From the course of right guidance, but then were guided.
He has come with the correct method of spiritual training
(tarbiya)
From among the explicitly established practices.
His aspiration (himma) uplifts the condition of the one who seeks
his Lord
So keep him company if you wish to achieve the goal.
There is more of this poem, for it its very lengthy.
Personal Attributes
As for his modesty and the beauty of his relations with the
creation, he had no equal in readiness to pardon or forgive. He
had no equal in generosity, patience, fairness, restraint,
dignity, loving affection, trustworthiness, service, fidelity,
sympathy and good manners in relation to every creature of
Allah. He had no equal in his loyal adherence to the Sunnah of
the Prophet, the Best of Creatures and the Secret of Wisdom.
Of such virtues, he was the pole (qu╙b) of their temple (mi╕rāb),
the key to their doors.
It should not be necessary to describe the beauty and
purity of his outward appearance; just as his inner being had
received the perfection of the Divine Essence, so had his outer
xlviii THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
being been endowed with Divine Beauty. May Allah not
deprive us of the pleasure of witnessing him and consorting
with him, in both the world of sense and signification. From
his light, his beauty and the cheerfulness of his face, the
radiant full-moon derives brilliance in the pitch-black night.
His ability to relate on good terms with his fellow
creatures, to give every creditor his rightful due and every
shareholder his rightful share, and to model himself on the
characteristics of his Lord – the Creator, the All-Generous, the
Ever-Giving, the Guide, the Kind and the Compassionate –
dazzled the minds of the well-versed masters. He observed the
stipulations concerning the Hereafter with regard to close
relatives and strangers, and he was always protective of the
rights of beloved friends. He had attained to the utmost
degree in humility, submissiveness, abstinence and repentant
devotion to Allah, in private and in public. He had entrusted
his affairs completely to Allah, with the best thoughts of Him,
and was completely indifferent to anything other than Him;
until he was recognized by the elite and the common folk, the
near and the far.
With regard to the love of Allah’s Messenger and the
people of his household, Allah had favored him with a station
that had never been achieved and never aspired to. That has
been expressed in verse by the poet and marvel of the time,
the famous erudite scholar and judge, Mu╕ammad ‘Abd-Allah
b. Mustafa al-‘Alawī:
May Allah reward Ibrāhīm for providing benefit
To the lowliest and the highest in relation to him
You see them spending the time in his home;
And establishing a residence during that sojourn.
For there they have no fear of thirst, nor of hunger;
Biography of the Author, Shaykh Ibrahim Niasse
xlix
xlix
And they fear no annoyance from him, nor any loathing.
Nor are they afraid of any humiliation or contempt;
Nor are they afraid of disappointment or anything else.
And the poet continued:
Among the proofs of Deputyship (khilāfa), he bears a sign
From Allah, not hidden from those who pay attention.
Upon his face is a light from Allah, shining brightly;
Allah prohibited everything from him except completeness and
perfection.
He is well acquainted with two servants of Allah22
How marvelous is their excellence and his, an abundant spring
For in the flood (fay╓a) of gnosis (‘irfān), the later generations
Resemble the earlier ones in beneficial knowledge.
As for his generosity, his beneficence, the abundance of his
plentiful gifts, his Divine endowment, his liberality and his
munificence: they are like the ocean and the pouring rain that
would leave ╔ātim23 consigned to oblivion. May the shawls of
gratitude for him never cease to be spread out, and may his
exploits never cease to be recounted and remembered.
Founding of Medina
In the beginning of his career, he lived in his father’s home in
Kaolack (Senegal). Allah supported him with the assistance of
those near to him. People started coming to him from various
lands, for Allah gave him what He had not given to any of his

22. The “two servants” are likely the Prophet Mu╕ammad and Shaykh
A╕mad Tijānī.
23. ╔ātim, a member of the tribe of Tayy, was renowned for boundless
generosity.
l THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
people before him. So the place became cramped for him,
because of the multitude of followers clinging to him. He
created a new city outside of Kaolack, called Madīnat al-Jadīd
(“the New City”), and this is where the incomparable Pole (alQu╙b al-farīd) came to reside. In this place, he built a mosque
(zāwiya) founded on the blessed day of Monday, in the middle
of the sacred month of Dhū al-Qa’da in the year 1349 (A.H.).24
He completed it in a space of time that was unusually short for
the construction of such a building, but its owner was for
Allah and Allah was for him, so nothing else need be said! It
was made habitable by the performance of the five ritual
prayers, the recital of the daily congregational litany (wa╛īfa) of
the ╘arīqa Tijāniyya, and the remembrance of Allah, day and
night, at all times, individually and in congregation. It became
famous among the people as the refuge of those who
remember Allah (zāwiya ahl al-dhikr).
Is not the mosque of Ibrāhīm founded on piety (taqwa)?
No sinful speech or idle talk is found in your land
The companionship of Abū ‘Abbās (al-Tijānī) is found in your
circle
You attained the loftiest status and the highest rank
The religion’s propagation is found within your circle
What good fortune for the one whose name is found therein
And from this takes inspiration
Indeed, he will see in this circle the balanced refuge for the
religion.
I have now relinquished control of the reins, in despair of
catching up with one tenth of one tenth of his perfections, his
exploits, his glorious deeds and the nobility of his character.

24. Corresponding to April 4, 1931.
Biography of the Author, Shaykh Ibrahim Niasse
li
li
But if someone contemplates the sparkling pearls of his being,
and the marvelous benefits that accumulated in him, his eye
will recognize the signs that point to his superiority and his
preeminence. I am one of those who bear witness to this.
O son of the noble ones, will you not draw near and carefully
consider
What has been related to you? For there is no observer like one
who listens.
His Noble Parents
As for his father ! he was the proof of Islam and the lamplight
of the darkness, the guardian of the Sacred Law, the reviver of
this Spiritual Path after the extinction of its lights, and the rebuilder of its structure and its minaret after the collapse of its
foundation. He was the most pious exemplar, the most
prudent in judgment, the brave hero, the one who reunited
that which had been scattered and dispersed. He was the
master among the preeminent men of this ideal Spiritual Path,
the greatest Shaykh, the most famous great saint, the orthodox
Sufi, our Shaykh and our master, al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah b. alSayyid Mu╕ammad. This Shaykh was a renowned
commentator on all the sciences, including the branches and
the roots, especially the Qur’ān and the Prophetic traditions. I
came across a document concerning his biography, in which
the writer says that this father had explained the Qur’ān to
certain men of distinction more than one hundred times. The
document also said that he had performed the Pilgrimage and
visited the tomb of the Prophet !, that he had exerted himself
with great endeavor for the sake of Allah, and that he had
awakened the eyes of the sleepers. From the blessed grace of
lii THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
this venerable master, we have received every benefit, bounty
and good fortune, so may Allah grant him a good reward on
our behalf. His exploits, his strength in the religion, his
abstinence and his piety are too profuse to be accounted for.
May Allah enable us and all our loved ones to derive real
benefit from him, and may He shower his blessings and his
fragrant perfumes upon us until the Day of Judgment. Amen,
O Lord of All the Worlds.
As for his mother, may Allah be well pleased with her, she
is the precious unique pearl and the priceless jewel. She is
righteous, pious, ascetic, virtuous, noble, and attentive to the
Lordly rights in her spiritual state and her speech. She is
devoted to the conduct and practices prescribed by the
Sunnah, to righteous deeds and meritorious actions worthy of
praise. She is endowed with abundant blessing and shining
lights, firmly rooted, fully capable, possessed with real
certainty, one who has taken hold of the strong rope; our
mother ‘Ā’isha bint Ibrāhīm. From the moment when Allah
placed her under the care of al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah, she never
ceased to be attentive to his good pleasure, exerting herself
strenuously in obedience to him. She never did anything that
would anger him or hurt him, or anything that would trouble
his mind or the minds of the relatives and neighbors, and she
never raised her voice above his voice. She used to treat him
graciously in every way, making every effort to please him,
and never opposing him in anything whatsoever. Whenever
he gave her an instruction, she promptly complied. Her
relationship with him never ceased to be like this, until he
departed from this worldly abode to the residence on high,
well pleased with her and grateful for her earnest endeavor.
Testimony to that has been given on her behalf by the elite and
Biography of the Author, Shaykh Ibrahim Niasse
liii
liii
the common folk, by friends and enemies alike. She is still
living at the present time. May Allah grant us the joy of her
prolonged life.
I have been informed by someone in whose word I trust –
the honorable master and great scholarly gnostic, my master
and my intimate friend, Abū Bakr b. Shaykh al-╔ājj ‘AbdAllah,25 – that this mother informed him that she had the
following experience: In the first month of her pregnancy with
this Shaykh, she saw herself in a dream, in which she seemed
to be standing on something and there was a deep well
beneath her. The moon suddenly split from the direction of the
East and fell upon her. She was afraid for herself and
extremely scared, and in the morning she came to the father of
this Shaykh and told him the story. Her husband warned her
to say nothing about it and keep it a secret saying, “You must
never talk to anyone about that again.”
She had also informed Abū Bakr that when she gave birth
to the child, the father summoned her and asked her, “Have
you any hopeful expectation for this son of yours?” She said:
“I said ‘Yes!’” He then asked her, “And what have you hoped
for him?” She replied, “I hope for the best for him, and that he
will be noble, virtuous and pious, if Allah wills!” The father
said to her, “Yes, I have also hoped for that, and know it will
come to be true if Allah prolongs his life and grants us the joy
of his survival.”
I have also been informed by a trustworthy source that al-
╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah said of ‘Ā’isha that she would certainly give
birth to a son who would inherit from him a complete and

25. Also known as Baye Mbaye (1903-1973), he was the youngest son of al-
╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah Niasse and one of the earliest disciples of Shaykh Ibrāhīm.
liv THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
perfect inheritance. He said, “If not, that will never again be
possible for anyone, because there was no one superior to her
among the women of bygone times.” Indeed, all words and
paper are not sufficient to record her virtues, excellent merits,
piety, beneficence, and good-natured treatment of every
creature of Allah, exalted is He.
We have reported here only as much as time has allowed
due to the absence of leisure. It has been arranged with
sensitivity, for fear of long-windedness and as a precaution
against that which wearies the minds. But what we have
concealed, in relation to what we have reported, is like a drop
of water in relation to the ocean, for we have been keen to
preserve the secrets and to make them inaccessible to
strangers. We beseech Allah to assist us at some other time in
the composition of a separate literary work, devoted to the
glorious exploits of this Shaykh and the special qualities by
which Allah has distinguished him among those who share his
lineage and the people of his era. This is not for Allah any
hard task.
By the Presences of Prophethood and Sainthood, I beseech
Allah that we, and all our loved ones and our brethren, derive
benefit from this Shaykh; a benefit that is both special and
universal, enduring for all eternity. May his fragrant perfumes
and his blessings return to us, and may the oceans of his
overflowing grace (fuyū╓āt) and support (amdādāt) overwhelm
us. Amen, O Lord of all the worlds!
I completed this short biography in the town of Kaolack on
Wednesday, the nineteenth of the sacred month of Dhū al-
╔ijja, in the year 1352.26 May Allah cause our city to prosper
and may He keep it safe. Amen. I am the poor one in need of

26. Corresponding to April 4, 1934.
Biography of the Author, Shaykh Ibrahim Niasse
lv
lv
Allah, exalted is He. I beseech Allah the Master to grant me
perfect purity and spiritual elevation to the ranks of noble
ones.
‘Alī Cisse b. Sayyid al-╔asan b. ‘Andal b. Sayyid Ibrāhīm,
may Allah be well pleased with them all.
lvii
Author’s Foreword
In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful
raise be to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, the
Compassionate, the Merciful, the Master of the Day of
Judgment. Praise to Him Who overwhelmed His saints
in seas of lights, Who favored them with the purity of the
spiritual states and the secrets, Who busied them with His
remembrance in the evening and the early morning, Who
gathered them under the wing of the Chosen Beloved
(Mu╕ammad). Praise be to Him Who made Himself known to
the saints, so they came to know Him directly and thus
departed from the sphere of ignorance and denial. Praise be to
Him Who chose them for His service, His love and the
fellowship of His purified righteous servants. Praise be to Him
Who attracted them to the presence of His Holiness, so they
were enraptured in the contemplation of Divine Majesty and
the witnessing of Divine Beauty, and so became wholly
immersed in beholding the Divine Perfection.
May blessing and peace be upon the supreme means of
access to Allah, the truest source of intimate knowledge; the
one to whom the perfection of the Essence was revealed, so he
P
lviii THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
became the focal point of the Names and the Attributes: our
master Mu╕ammad !. And peace be upon his family and his
companions, the rightly guided; and the successive
generations, and all those who follow them in spiritual
excellence until the Day of Judgment. And special salutations
to (Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī,) his grandson and the inheritor of
his secrets; the helper of the saintly poles (aq╙āb), the saints
(awliyā’) and the gnostic sages (‘ārifīn); the support of the great
ones, the righteous, the martyrs, the saintly-substitutes
(budalā’) and the champions of the Truth.
The following remarks are offered by the poor servant in
dire need of the mercy of his Compassionate Master, the
oblivious one who readily admits his ignorance and his
shortcoming, Ibrāhīm, the son of Shaykh al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah.
By the gracious favor of his Master, may he never cease to be
enraptured in the Beauty of His Majesty!
Since ignorance, stupidity, envy and stubbornness have
become widespread in these lands of ours, negative criticism is
frequently leveled at the people of the Tijānī Flood (ahl alFay╓a al-Tijāniyya), alleging that they have corrupted the
Spiritual Path. This is nothing but the denial of their own
Shaykh (A╕mad al-Tijānī), who, out of the gracious favor from
the Compassionate Lord, has been our guide and support
since the appearance of this Mu╕ammadan-A╕madanAbrahamic, Rightly-Guided Tijānī Flood (al-Fay╓a al-Tijāniyya
al-A╕madiyya al-Mu╕ammadiyya al-Ibrāhīmiyya al-╔anīfiyya). I
therefore ignored this ignorance for a very long time, even
when they came up with preposterous defamations on
account of my being aligned with the Tijānī Flood. May Allah
protect us from being like those whose fields of pasture
resemble the barren wastelands. Afraid of my lower self (nafs)
Author’s Foreword
lix
lix
and the rejection of my Muslim brethren, I made myself
content with the defense provided by the Holy Presence
(╕a╓rat al-quds), for indeed this Presence defends itself and
those who have faith in it. May Allah include us among His
servants who rely on Him alone.
This continued for a long period of time, and they
continued engaging themselves in negative criticism,
falsehood and slander. Finally, it occurred to me that I should
collect something from the speeches of the venerable Imams,
concerning the explanation of the doctrines of the saintly
servants of Allah. I therefore sought help from Allah the
Exalted and embarked on the composition of this blessed
book, obtaining support from the abundant grace of the
venerable sun of the religion, our master Shaykh al-Tijānī, the
owner of the firmly established station. Refuting them is
indeed a rejoinder on behalf of this Shaykh Tijānī, the Seal of
the Saints, since he is the owner of the Tijānī Flood and the one
who bestows it upon his companions, by means of his
ancestor, the Prophet !, who received it from the Presence of
the Lord of lords. So this work became obligatory on me, since
I am a servant (khadīm) of that majestic dignitary (al-Tijānī).
I have arranged the contents of this work into a general
introduction and three sections, each with three chapters;
followed by a general conclusion. The introduction deals with
the correct interpretation of Shaykh Zarrūq’s statement – on
the authority of his Shaykh al-╔a╓ramī – concerning the
cessation of spiritual training (tarbiya). The first section
addresses three issues: 1) the reality of Sufism and sources for
teaching the liturgical remembrances (adhkār); 2) the excellence
of the liturgical remembrance and its being the most direct
lx THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
path to Allah; and 3) the congregational remembrance and
Qur’ān recitation. The second section treats the following
issues: 1) the Tijānī flood and what its owner (al-Tijānī) said
about it; 2) the orthodox foundation of the sciences of spiritual
experience (‘ulūm al-adhwāq); and 3) the sphere of spiritual
training (tarbiya) in the ╘arīqa Tijāniyya. The third chapter
contains the following sections: 1) a warning against criticism
of one’s Muslim brethren, and those for whom such criticism
is permissible; 2) the necessity of seeking a shaykh who is
capable of spiritual training, his character, and the spiritual
state of the disciple; and 3) the veracity of the visionary
experiences of the people of spiritual distinction, and what the
scholars have said about seeing the Essential Being (Dhāt) of
the Exalted and Glorious Creator. The conclusion deals with
our own confidence in and reliance on the sciences and secrets
of the Spiritual Path of Shaykh al-Tijānī, the Seal of the Saints.
I beseech Allah, with the tongue of humility and the
speech of self-effacement, that my book may be sincerely
devoted to His Noble Countenance, and that it may benefit me
and be of benefit to my believing brethren until the Day of
Judgment. I have given it the title: The Removal of Confusion
Concerning the Flood of the Saintly Seal A╕mad al-Tijānī. Now let
us embark on the intended purpose with the assistance of the
Glorified Divine Sovereign. And all success is achieved with
the help of Allah, for He is the Guide by His grace to the
straight path.
1
General Introduction
ccording to Sīdī (A╕mad) Zarrūq,1 in the book Ta’sīs
al-Qawā’id: “Our Shaykh Abū al-‘Abbās al-╔a╓ramī
! said: ‘Spiritual training (tarbiya) in the technical
sense has ceased to be practiced, and all that remains is
training by spiritual zeal (himma) and state (╕āl). So it is
incumbent on you to follow the Qur’ān and the Sunnah,
without addition or subtraction.’” The rest of this quotation

1. Sīdī A╕mad Zarrūq al-Burnusi al-Fasi (d. 1493) was a North African
scholarly Sufi who stressed the proper balance between the Sacred Law
(shari’a) and Sufism. He spent many years in Cairo, where he studied under
Mu╕ammad al-Sakhawi, the student of Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani. His primary
spiritual guide in Cairo was A╕mad b. ‘Uqba al-╔a╓ramī (d. 1489), a saint
with both Shādhili and Qadiri Sufi affiliation, who was originally from
Yemen but who had settled in Cairo. Zarrūq himself eventually settled in
Libya. Like his Shaykh ╔a╓ramī, Zarrūq’s exact Sufi affliliations are
ambiguous, seemingly a mixture of the Shadhiliyya, Qadiriyya and
Suhrawardiyya lines of transmission and practices. He authored numerous
works on jurisprudence, Prophetic traditions, supplications and Sufism. The
work cited here is one of his more important on the subject of Sufism: Ta’sīs
al-Qawā’id wa al-Usūl wa Ta╕╗īl al-Fawā’id li-dhawī al-Wu╗ūl fi al-Ta╗awwuf. For
more on Shaykh A╕mad Zarrūq, see Scott Kugle, Rebel between Spirit and
Law: A╕mad Zarruq, Sainthood, and Authority in Islam (Indiana University
Press, 2006); and Ali Fahmi Khashim, Zarruq, the Sufi: a guide in the way and a
leader to the truth: a biographical and critical study of a mystic from North Africa
(Outline Series, 1976); and Zaineb Istrabadi, “The Principles of Sufism
(Qawā’id al-Ta╗awwuf)”: An annotated translation with introduction (PhD
Thesis, Indiana University, 1988).
A
2 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
will be presented later. But let us say here that this statement,
made in the ninth century after the Hijra (sixteenth century of
the Common Era), should not be understood, especially by the
one deprived of spiritual experience and gnosis, as meaning
that spiritual training has ceased absolutely. Neither Zarrūq
nor his Shaykh al-╔a╓ramī meant this. The actual meaning
intended was explained by the erudite scholar Ibn ‘Ajība2 in
his Īqā╛ al-Himam:
Some might hold to the literal meaning of al-╔a╓ramī’s words:
“Spiritual training in the technical sense has ceased to be
practiced, and all that remains is training by spiritual zeal and
state. So it is incumbent on you to follow the Qur’ān and the
Sunnah.” My response to this is as follows: Al-╔a╓ramī did not
mean to say that the cessation of spiritual training will last for all
eternity. Far be it from al-╔a╓ramī to pass such judgment on
Allah and limit His Power! What he meant was that there were
many impostors and pretenders in his time, so he warned his
contemporaries to beware of them. The high erudition of al-
╔a╓ramī and Zarrūq is inconsistent with the literal meaning of
their words. Even if they are held to the literal meaning, that
spiritual training had ceased for all eternity, they are surely not
infallible. Every statement, theirs included, is subject to
evaluation, except for the statement of our Prophet !. Indeed,
following the time of al-╔a╓ramī, an innumerable number of
distinguished Sufi scholars have been carrying out orthodox
spiritual training by means of spiritual states (╕āl), spoken words
(maqāl), and zeal (himma). They also exist in this time of ours,

2. A╕mad Ibn ‘Ajība (d. 1809) was a prominent scholar of the Shadhiliyya
Sufi order in Morocco. His commentary on the Kitāb al-╔ikam by Ibn ‘A╙ā
Allah (d. 1309, Alexandria), entitled Īqā╛ al-Himam, is considered one of the
best of many such commentaries, and it is widely known in West Africa. His
autobiography has been translated: The Autobiography (Fahrasa) of a Moroccan
Sufi: A╕mad ibn ‘Ajiba, by Jean-Louis Michon and David Streight (Fons Vitae,
1999).
General Introduction
3
3
famous like radiant beacons. Allah has guided many of the
creation with their assistance, and with their help He has taught
the saints what no one knows, except those whom Allah has
blessed.
Ibn ‘Ajība’s explanation is proven by the appearance of
Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī, the Seal of Saints and the standardbearer of spiritual training well after the ninth-century
statements of al-╔a╓ramī and his student. Shaykh al-Tijānī’s
role as a spiritual trainer cannot be doubted by anyone
endowed with the slightest faith in and submission to him.
The same is true of Shaykh al-Sayyid al-Mukhtār al-Kuntī,3 as
well as the perfected ones who were trained by such men, and
thereby attained to the highest rank of those shaykhs
providing spiritual training (tarbiya) and elevation (tarqiya).
The erudite scholar and knowledgeable one of Allah, Sīdī
‘Ubayda b. Mu╕ammad al-╖aghīr,4 the author of Mīzāb alRa╕ma, had this to say in honor of Shaykh al-Tijānī, may Allah

3. Al-Mukhtār al-Kuntī (d. 1811), described by Shaykh Ibrāhīm elsewhere in
the text as “the shaykh of shaykhs, the renowned scholar and Divine
gnostic,” was one of the most important Qadiri shaykh and scholar in
eighteenth-century West Africa. He lived in Timbuktu, Mali, but revived the
Qadiriyya Sufi order throughout West Africa, becoming the shaykh of
Usman dan Fodio (d. 1817), the founder of the Sokoto Caliphate based in
northern Nigeria, as well as several Mauritanian branches of the Qadiriyya.
His most important work was al-Kawkab al-Waqqād fī fa╓l dhikr al-mashā’ikh
wa ╕aqā’iq. For more on Kuntī, see Aziz Batran, The Qadiryya brotherhood in
West Africa and the Western Sahara: the life and times of Shaykh al-Mukhtar alKunti, (1729-1811) (Rabat: Université Mohammed V, 2001).
4. ‘Ubayda b. Mu╕ammad al-╖aghīr was a nineteenth-century Mauritanian
scholar of the ╔āfi╛iyya Tijānī legacy. His primary work, Mīzāb al-Ra╕ma fī
al-Tarbiya bi al-╘arīqa al-Tijāniyya, is considered a synthesis of the teachings
of Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛ al-Shinqiti. The book, written in 1851, details a
process of spiritual training (tarbiya) based on the principle of gratitude
(shukr) passing through the three stations of Islam, Iman and Ihsan.
4 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
be well pleased with him, and may He enable us to benefit by
him:
Without seclusion (khalwa) he gave spiritual training, while
others trained by seclusion
So what a difference there is between the two Yazīds in style!5
According to Sayyid al-‘Arabī b. al-Sā’i╕ !:6
Our goal in spiritual training within this Sufi Path is to be free
from the necessity of seclusion (khalwa), withdrawal from the
people, and other such practices involving extreme severity with
the self (nafs). We insist that spiritual training from the
beginning must be carried out in accordance with the method of
the righteous early believers (al-salaf al-╗āli╕). This original
method is the way of thankfulness (╙arīqat al-shukr), happiness
with the Glorious Benefactor and spiritual discipline of the heart
(al-riyā╓at al-qalbiyya). This is opposed to the other method,
invented by those who came after the first three centuries of
Islam, adopted as a technique to meet the difficulties of the time.
This method entails strenuous exertion, physical suffering and
discipline of the body. The difference between the two methods
is that the first is directed at (purifying) the hearts, while the
second is directed against the physical body.
Indeed, the crucial factor in attaining to the Presence of
Allah the Exalted is the purification of the heart. What purifies or
corrupts the heart is in accordance with the immaculate Sacred
Law and the enlightened Prophetic tradition. The heart is not
necessarily purified by oppressing the self with asceticism,

5. This is an idiomatic phrase in Arabic simply meaning there is a great
disparity between the two things mentioned.
6. Mu╕ammad al-‘Arabī b. al-Sā’i╕ (d. 1892, Rabat) was one of the most
celebrated Tijānī scholars of the nineteenth century. His work Bughyat alMustafīd is one of the primary works of the Order. Among his other writings
is al-Jawāb al-Shāfī, which is the source for this citation in question. For more
on his life and work, see Abdelaziz Benabdallah, Le Soufisme Afro-Maghrebin
aux XIX et XXème Siècles (Rabat, 1995).
General Introduction
5
5
dietary restriction, shabby clothing, or continuous physical
discomfort; unless one attends to the conditions of the heart.
Those who came after the first three centuries of Islam chose
to implement the second method due to the multiplicity of
lustful desires and the development of (misguided) opinions.
They resorted to this in order to purify and improve the ego-self,
and to illuminate the heart and rid it of lusts. But they were
careful not to exaggerate (in their practices), to go beyond the
limit of conventional observance, or to transgress into heretical
innovation.
According to Shaykh Abū ‘Abd-Allah b. ‘Abbād:7
It is a heretical innovation to attempt to purify the soul (nafs) by
isolation, the restriction of diet to herbs and bran, and the
endurance of excessive asceticism and poverty, without attention
to the states of the heart. Emphasis should be on what endows
the heart with commendable traits, and what removes it from
blameworthy traits. Groups of people have mistakenly practiced
exercises of physical deprivation, strenuously exerting
themselves, with no intention of sincere devotion to their Lord.
The result was only the confusion of their minds and the
depletion of their physical strength. They obtained no profit
from their actions. All this was due to their ignorance of the
Prophetic Sunnah and practice of the early righteous believers
(al-salaf al-╗āli╕).

7. Abū ‘Abd-Allah b. ‘Abbād al-Rundī (d. 1390) was born in Ronda,
Andalusia, and later settled in Fes, Morocco; where he led the Friday prayer
in the Qarawiyyin mosque. He was a renowned shaykh of the Shadhiliyya
order, and authored the first commentary on the ╔ikam of Ibn ‘A╙ā Allah,
entitled Ghayth al-Mawāhib al-’Alīyya, which is also known as al-Tanbīh. He
also authored two collections of letters. For more on his life and works, see
John Renard (translated), Ibn ‘Abbad of Ronda: Letters on the Sufi Path (Paulist
Press, 1986).
6 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
The abundantly-gifted Sayyid al-‘Arabī also said in his
book al-Jawāb al-Shāfī:
Praise be to Allah, there are many who carry the burdens of
training in our Spiritual Path (╘arīqa). No country and no time
have been devoid of them since the demise of our master, the
Shaykh (al-Tijānī) !. In fact, a number of them emerged in the
Shaykh’s lifetime, although they did not make a public display
of this because of the rule of the age. They were detected only by
those for whom Allah the Almighty has foreordained the
opportunity to benefit from them. Their remaining hidden was
due to what they gained through the blessed grace of their
teacher: the state of perfection called “jealous guardianship of
Allah’s secrets” (al-ghayra ‘ala Allah). This state of concealment of
one’s secret thoughts and innermost feelings comprises the
general behavior of the hidden and innocent Malamatiyya.8 So
their real qualities are unknown, for they show no sign to
indicate that they are endowed with Allah’s providential care.
They blend in with the common people in their external
behavior and ordinary religious devotions, and thus are not
usually recognized as the people of Allah’s special favor. This is
a position in which Allah the Exalted established them, adorning
them with excellent merit, whether they are aware of it or not.
Sayyid al-‘Arabī also said, as recorded in al-Bughyat (alMustafīd):
To summarize the matter: among the unique individuals of this
Mu╕ammadan Spiritual Path (al-╘arīqa al-Mu╕ammadiyya), there
exist people qualified to provide spiritual training. They do so
by means of the litany (wird) and other remembrances of the

8. The Malamatiyya were Sufis that invite public reproach by pretending to
be engaged in reprehensible behavior. This was a means of hiding their real
spiritual position and purifying their ego-selves. Later Sufis justified the
appellation “Malamati” for a person of high spiritual state who blended
with the ordinary Muslims, not distinguishing himself by public displays of
piety beyond that normally practiced by the Muslim community.
General Introduction
7
7
Tijāniyya, in accordance with the stipulations regarding this
established by the Shaykh on the basis of what he received from
the Prophet !. This method was taught the Shaykh by the
Prophet ! for the people of the Spiritual Path, so it is a guarantee
of secret knowledge, benefits and blessings. There is no
possibility of departing from what the Prophet ! has granted,
and on which he has fixed his guarantee. The extent of our
explanation on this is sufficient here, and Allah is the Custodian
of enabling grace and guidance.
Our Shaykh and means of access to our Lord, Shaykh
A╕mad al-Tijānī, Seal of the Saints !, has demonstrated that
among the people of his Spiritual Path are the masters of
spiritual training (mashā’ikh al-tarbiya). This is indicated by his
authentic statements recorded in the Jāmi’:9
(He said) “If Allah grants illumination (fat╕) to my companions,
the one among them who sits in my presence, in the town where
I am, will fear his own destruction (halāk).” One of his
companions asked him, “Is this from you, or from Allah?” To
this he replied, “It is from Allah, without my having a choice in
the matter.” He mentioned this on the second Sunday of the
sacred month of Sha’ban, in the year 1223 of the Hijra (1808
C.E.). Then he said on the next Monday: “The fear that was
mentioned is for the one among my companions who has been
authorized with the power of Divine disposition (ta╗arruf), and
to provide his fellow creatures with spiritual training (tarbiya).”
The complete statement of Sīdī Zarrūq in Ta’sīs al-Qawā’id
partially quoted earlier reads as follows:

9. The Kitāb al-Jāmi’ li al-‘Ulūm al-Fā’ida min Bi╕ār al-Qu╙b al-Maktūm is one of
the primary sources of the Tijānī order, written during the founder’s lifetime
in 1808. Its author was Mu╕ammad b. al-Mishrī, a prominent Sufi and
scholar from Constantine, Algeria. Unlike the Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī, the work has
never been published.
8 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
We conclude with the statement of our Shaykh Abū al-‘Abbās al-
╔a╓ramī !: “Spiritual training (tarbiya) in the technical sense has
ceased to be practiced, and all that remains is training by
spiritual zeal (himma) and state (╕āl). So it is incumbent on you to
follow the Qur’ān and the Sunnah, without addition or
subtraction. This applies to one’s dealing with the Real (al-╔aqq),
with one’s own self (nafs), and with the creation.
“Three things must be observed in one’s relationship to the
Real: the performance of obligatory duties, the avoidance of
forbidden things, and the submission to the rule of the Sacred
Law.
“Three things also must be observed in dealing with one’s
ego-self (nafs): moderation, refraining from exciting it, guarding
against its mischievous impulses toward (arbitrary) attraction
and repulsion, acceptance and rejection, approach and retreat.
“There are also three things to observe in one’s relationship
with the creation: providing their rightful dues, withholding
oneself from their possessions, and eschewing that which
disturbs their hearts, except in the unavoidable case of genuine
necessity.
“The aspirant (murīd) is doomed to destruction and failure if
he should manifest any of the following: ostentation; a desire to
influence the general administration of affairs; taking it on
himself to correct the reprehensible behavior of the general
public; preoccupation with Holy War (jihād), while neglecting
other virtues; wanting to monopolize all merits for himself;
seeking out the imperfections of his fellow brothers;
preoccupation with warning others; acting on hearsay;
participating in social gatherings with neither the intention to
learn nor to teach; mixing with worldly leaders under the pretext
of religious devotion; preoccupation with subtle intricacies (of
the religion), rather than actual practice to rectify his faults;
undertaking spiritual training (tarbiya) without authorization
(taqdīm) from a shaykh, imam or scholar; following any and
General Introduction
9
9
every person, the one speaking truth and the one speaking
falsehood, without distinguishing their spiritual states; looking
down on those connected to Allah, and assuming their
insincerity because of what he sees in them; fondness for special
permissions and ambiguous interpretations; preferring the
esoteric (bā╙in) to the apparent (╛āhir), or remaining content with
the apparent without reference to the esoteric, or concluding
something from one incompatible with the other; being satisfied
with knowledge without practice, or practice without
knowledge or reference to the spiritual state (╕āl), or spiritual
state without knowledge or practice; non-substantiation of his
knowledge, practice, spiritual state or religious conviction in the
sources of the Muslim community, such as the books of Ibn ‘A╙ā’
Allah concerning esoteric knowledge, especially the Tanwīr,
10 or
the Madkhal of Ibn al-╔ājj11 concerning exoteric knowledge, or
the book of his Shaykh Ibn Abī Jamra,12 and the works of the
scholars who followed them. But if such an aspirant accepts the
teachings of these authorities, he will be saved as a Muslim, if
Allah wills. Virtuousness and success are from Allah.
“Allah’s Messenger ! was asked about the verse of the
Qur’ān: ‘O you who believe! Guard your own souls!’ (5:105). He
replied, ‘When you see greedy lust being obeyed, passionate
desire being pursued, and every holder of an opinion taking
conceited pride in his opinion; be on special guard for your own

10. Ibn ‘A╙ā’ Allah al-Iskandarī (d. 1309), Kitāb al-Tanwīr fī Isāt al-Tadbīr has
been described as the “basic training manual for Sufis in North Africa.” It
has been translated by Scott Kugle, The Book of Illumination (Fons Vitae,
2005).
11. Mu╕ammad b. al-╔ājj al-Abdari al-Fasi (d. 1336) taught at the Qayrawin
University in Fes, Morocco, but traveled throughout North Africa and is
buried in Egypt. His work, Madkhal al-Shara al-Sharīf ‘ala al-Madhāhib is a four
volume work discussing various points of Islamic law.
12. Ibn Abī Jamra (d. 1300) was a renowned ╔adīth scholar and jurist of the
Maliki school, originally from Andalusia but who settled in Cairo. His major
work was Bahjat al-Nufūs, which is a commentary on ╖a╕ī╕ Bukhārī.
10 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
soul (nafs)’13 He ! also related a statement from the Scrolls of
Abraham (╗u╕uf Ibrāhīm):
The intelligent person should be aware of his age (zaman),
hold his tongue and mind his business. The intelligent one
should also hold on to four times: a time in which he calls
himself to account; a time he confides in his Lord; a time he
spends with his brothers, the ones who make him aware of
his faults and guide him toward his Lord; and a time in
which he allows himself to enjoy permissible desires.
May Allah provide us with this and help us in it. May He
enable us and our companions to benefit thereby, for we are
helpless without Him! He is sufficient for us, an excellent
Custodian. May Allah bless our master, Prophet and patron,
Mu╕ammad, and peace upon his family and companions.”
Careful study of Shaykh Abū al-‘Abbās al-╔a╓ramī’s
above statement reveals its true meaning. This is why the
gnostic of Allah, al-Sayyid al-‘Arabī b. al-Sā’i╕ explained:
The meaning of spiritual training (tarbiya) in this context
(alluded to by Zarrūq) is spiritual training in the technical sense,
which was developed after the first three centuries (following
the Prophet !). This is the spiritual training which Shaykh
Zarrūq believed, on the authority of some of his masters, had
ceased to be practiced. He was followed in this regard by the
scholarly researcher al-Yūsī,14 may Allah have mercy on him,
who said: “In the opinion of al-╔a╓ramī and Zarrūq, the
meaning was not that spiritual training has ceased in the sense of

13. Reported by Abū Dāwūd in his Sunan, by Imam al-Tirmidhī in his Sunan,
and by Ibn Mājah in his Sunan.
14. Abū ‘Alī al-Hassan b. Mas’ud al-Yusi (d. 1691) was one of the more
famous Moroccan Sufis of the seventeenth century. He was associated with
the Nasiriyya branch of the Shadhiliyya Sufi order and authored numerous
works covering a range of Islamic sciences. For more information, see
Jacques Berque, Al-Yousi: Problèmes de la Culture Marocaine au 17e Siècle
(Paris, 1958).
General Introduction
11
11
providing guidance based on the Qur’ān and the Sunnah, and
the teaching of remembrance (dhikr). Nor did it mean the end of
removing falsehood from the soul, ridding it of attachments and
obstacles, with the support and spiritual zeal of the shaykh.
Indeed, this (role of the shaykh) is by the permission he receives
in his innermost being from the Presence of Allah, or the
Presence of His Messenger !, either in a state of wakefulness or
sleep. Far be it from the people of Allah to think (such training
has ceased)!” For more on this subject, consult al-Dhahab alIbrīz.
15
Here is the relevant text from al-Dhahab al-Ibrīz recording
the words of Shaykh ‘Abd al-‘Azīz al-Dabbāgh ! in response
to the issue at hand:
Spiritual training (tarbiya) entails purifying the soul (nafs) and
purging it of its deficiencies, so that it becomes capable of
bearing the Secret. There is no way to achieve this other than
removing the darkness from the soul and severing the ties of
falsehood that bind it. The severance of falsehood is sometimes
due to an innate purity, so Allah cleanses the soul without any
intermediary. This was the state of affairs in the first three
virtuous centuries. These were the best of the centuries; then,
people were devoted to the Truth and constantly focused upon
it. When they slept, they slept upon it. When they awoke, they
woke with it. When they moved, they moved in it. If Allah were
to permit somebody to examine their inner beings, he would
find their minds devoted exclusively to Allah and His

15. Al-Dhahab al-Ibrīz was written in 1720 by the disciple of the Shadhili Sufi,
Shaykh ‘Abd al-‘Azīz al-Dabbāgh (d. 1717, Fes), A╕mad al-Lamati. The work
has remained extremely influential around the Muslim world ever since,
and is one of the sources for emergence of the Tariqa Mu╕ammadiyya
phenomenon since the late 18th century. For a translation see John O’Kane
and Bernd Radtke, Pure God from the Words of Sayyidi Abd al-Aziz al-Dabbagh:
Al-Dhahab al-Ibriz min Kalam Sayyidi Abd al-Aziz al-Dabbagh (Brill, 2007).
12 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Messenger, seeking His good pleasure. What goodness
abounded in them because of this! The light of the Truth shone
in their natures. Such knowledge and high degrees of
independent scholarly reasoning (ijtihād) appeared in them as
cannot be qualified or defined.
There was no need for spiritual training in these centuries.
The master (shaykh) would simply meet with his disciple, the
companion (╗ā╕ib) of his secret and inheritor of his light; then
speak to him in his ear (udhn), and illumination (fat╕) would
come to the disciple without further ado. This was because of the
pure natures and clear minds of these people, and their ardent
yearning for the path of right guidance.
The severance of darkness from people’s essential beings
may sometimes be due to the instrumental influence of the
shaykh. This came to be the case following the virtuous
centuries, when people’s intentions had become corrupted,
when their innermost thoughts became empty of aspiration,
their minds attached to this world, focused on satisfying lusts
and giving the ego-self its full share. The shaykh possessing
spiritual insight (ba╗īra) began to meet his disciple and inheritor
to get to know him first. He would look into him, and find that
his mind was attached to falsehood and the gratification of lusts,
and that his essential being (dhāt) followed his errant mind. He
would find the disciple seeking distraction with the heedless,
lost in the company of the negligent, and wavering to and fro
with the purveyors of falsehood. Since the mind was yoked to
falsehood, unattached to the Truth, the disciple’s limbs and
organs moved only for blameworthy purposes.
When the shaykh found the disciple in this condition, he
would command him to practice secluded retreat (khalwa),
remembrance (dhikr) and to eat less. In the retreat, the disciple
could be separated from the prattling liars, who are counted
among the dead. The remembrance of Allah would bring to an
end the false words, the distraction of his mind and the nonsense
General Introduction
13
13
on his tongue. The frugal diet would diminish the steam in the
blood, lessening his lustful appetites. The mind could then
return to the dedication to Allah and His Messenger. When the
disciple attained to this extent of purity and clarity, his essential
being would be capable of bearing the Secret. So this was the aim
of the masters (shuyūkh) in their use of spiritual training (tarbiya)
and secluded retreat (khalwa).
The affair continued like this for a period of time. Then, the
truth became mixed with falsehood, and the light overshadowed
by darkness. The people of falsehood began to undertake the
spiritual training of those who came to them, putting them in
secluded retreat and teaching them the Divine Names. But their
intention was corrupt, and their purpose diverged from the
Truth. They added spellbinding incantations and ambiguous
figures of speech. The result was cunning deceit (makr) and false
enticements away from Allah the Exalted. Such practices were
widespread in the time of Shaykh Zarrūq ! and his Shaykh (al-
╔a╓ramī). It became clear to them that the counsel of Allah and
His Messenger in this case was to warn people to desist from this
training since the people of falsehood had become engaged in it.
Their advice was that people should stand in the open square of
security: that of adherence to the Sunnah and the Qur’ān, in
which there was neither fear nor sorrow. Indeed, those who are
guided by the Qur’ān and the Sunnah do not go astray.
The statement of Zarrūq and al-╔a╓ramī, may Allah be
pleased with them, emerged from this context of giving advice
and warning. Their intention was not to insist on the absolute
cessation of genuine spiritual training. Far be it from them to say
such a thing! Indeed, the light of the Prophet ! remains with us.
His message (khabar) is inclusive and comprehensive, and his
blessings (barakāt) are universal, lasting to the Day of
Resurrection.
14 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
There are several Qur’ānic verses and Prophetic traditions
which contain indications and glad tidings concerning this
group (╙ā’ifa) manifestly committed to the Truth. And they are
not limited to a particular time or place. For example, Allah
the Exalted said: “And among those whom We have created
there is a community who guide with the Truth and establish
justice therewith” (Qur’ān, 7:181). In his marginal commentary
on the Jalālayn, the scholarly gnostic, Shaykh Sīdī al-╖āwī16
said of this verse: “They are the community of Mu╕ammad !,
since in a Prophetic tradition he ! said: ‘A group from my
community will not cease being committed to the Truth, until
Allah’s (final) command arrives.’”17 Mu’āwiya once said while
delivering a sermon: “I once heard Allah’s Messenger ! say,
‘Among my community there will never cease being a group
obedient to Allah’s command. They will not be harmed by
those who forsake or oppose them, until Allah’s (final)
command arrives while they are committed to this.’”18
This group is not limited to any particular time, or to any
particular location. Indeed, they are present in every place and
time, for Islam always will be raised high and never be
surpassed. The wanton sinners and purveyors of evil,
however many they are, bear no consequence (on the
ascendency of Islam). This is glad tidings for the community of

16. A╕mad al-╖āwī (d. 1825) was an important Indian scholar of the Maliki
school of jurisprudence (madhhab) who wrote a commentary (╕āshiya) on the
Tafsīr al-Jalālayn of Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyū╙ī and Jalāl al-Dīn al-Ma╕allī. ╖āwī’s
╔āshiya became popular among West African scholars, for whom the Tafsīr
al-Jalālayn has been one of the most important works of exegesis for
centuries.
17. Reported by Imam al-Bukhārī in his ╖a╕ī╕, by Imam Muslim in his ╖a╕ī╕,
by Abū Dāwūd in his Sunan, by al-Tirmidhī in his Sunan, and by A╕mad b.
Hanbal in his Musnad.
18. ╔adīth reported in the collections of Muslim and Abū Dāwūd.
General Introduction
15
15
Mu╕ammad, making it known that Islam and the Muslims are
endowed with sublimity and honor until the Day of
Resurrection draws near. At this point, the bearers of the
Qur’ān and the religious scholars will die. The Qur’ān will be
erased from the books. The gentle wind will blow, and all in
whom there is a tiny speck of faith with die. And this will not
happen until after the (return and) death of Jesus, peace be
upon him. Jesus will not die until after he slays the Antichrist
(al-Dajjāl) and lives for forty years, as the Prophetic traditions
have repeatedly confirmed. The Antichrist will not come until
one hundred and seven years after the Mahdī.
One narration reports the Prophet’s words: “There will
always be a group in the West (al-Maghrib) …”19 Mu╕yī al-Dīn
Ibn al-‘Arabī al-╔ātimī20 explained, “Allah placed the station
of the Seal (al-khatmiyya) and Concealment (al-katmiyya) in
Morocco (al-Maghrib), for that is the place of secrets and
concealment.” For more on this, consult Ibn al-‘Arabī’s alFutū╕āt (al-Makkiyya) and his ‘Anqā’ Mughrib fī Khatm al-

19. The full version of this ╔adīth, found in ╖a╕ī╕ Muslim on the authority of
Abū Hurayra: “The people of the West (al-Maghrib) will remain manifestly
committed to the Truth, they will not be harmed by those who go against
them or forsake them until the Final Hour.” Imam A╕mad b. Hanbal
considered this to refer to the people of Shām (Syria), but other scholars
considered this to refer to North Africa, as al-Maghrib is the Arabic name for
Morocco. Certainly this latter opinion was held by Ibn al-‘Arabī.
20. Mu╕yī al-Dīn Ibn al-‘Arabī al-╔ātimī (d. 1240) was born in Andalusia
and later settled in Syria. He was known as “the Greatest Shaykh,” and his
writings have influenced later Sufi scholars, including those of the Tijāniyya.
His most comprehensive work is the multi-volume Futū╕āt al-Makkiyya
(“Meccan Illuminations”). Other writings include the Fusus al-╔ikam and the
‘Anqā’ Mughrib. This latter work speaks about the Seal of the Saints that will
be found in Fes, Morocco. Numerous studies have appeared on the Shaykh
and his writings. Noteworthy among these are the works of Henry Corbin,
Michel Chodkiewicz, William Chittick, Titus Burckhardt, Claude Addas,
Michael Sells and Alexander Knysh.
16 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Awliyā’ wa shams al-Maghrib. See also the Bughyat (al-Mustafīd
of Mu╕ammad al-‘Arabī b. al-Sā’i╕).
Allah the Exalted has said: “A multitude from the earlier
generations, and a multitude from the later generations”
(Qur’ān, 56:39-40). Ibn ‘Abbās reported that Allah’s Messenger
! said: “The two multitudes are from my community.”21 This
is found in al-Jawāhir al-╔isān.22 According to Shihāb al-Dīn alKhafājī in Nasīm al-Riyā╓:23
The Prophet’s saying, “The best of you are my generation, then
those who will follow them, then those who will follow them,”24
is not inconsistent with his saying, “My community is like the
rain, for it is not known whether the best is in its first part or in
its last.” 25 The first part comes in one valley, and the last comes
in another; meaning that somebody may come in this
community (of Mu╕ammad) who provides people with
tremendous benefit, beyond the means of anyone who preceded
him. The first rain refers to particular individuals (from the
earlier generations), while the second rain refers to the complete
span of time (comprising the later generations); and indeed,
what a difference there is between the two (for individuals to
equal the whole span of time)!
Shaykh Zarrūq ! said in Ta’sīs al-Qawā’id:
The preferential regard for certain times and people is a vestige

21. Reported by Imam Ibn Jarīr al-╘abarī in his Tafsīr, and cited by Imam alHaythami in Majma’ al-Zawā’id wa Mamba’ al-Fawā’id.
22. This is the multi-volume Qur’ān exegesis, Jawāhir al-╔isān fī Tafsīr alQur’ān, by Abd al-Ra╕mān al-Tha’alibi (d. 1471).
23. This is the Nasīm al-Riyā╓ fī shar╕ Shifā’ al-Qā╓ī Īyād, a commentary on the
Shifā’ of Qadi Iyad (work of ╔adīth and Prophetic biography from the 12th
century) by the Egyptian Hanafi scholar Shihāb al-Dīn al-Khafājī (d. 1659).
24. Reported by al-Bukhārī in his ╖a╕ī╕, by Imam Muslim in his ╖a╕ī╕, by alNasā’ī in his Sunan, by A╕mad in his Musnad, by al-╘a╕āwī in Shar╕ Ma’āni
al-Āthār, and by al-╘abarānī in al-Mu’jam al-Kabīr.
25. Reported by al-Tirmidhī in his Sunan and by A╕mad b. Hanbal in his
Musnad.
General Introduction
17
17
of pagan ignorance and has no legal foundation. Thus the
unbelievers said, “If only this Qur’ān had been revealed to some
great man from the two towns” (Qur’ān, 43:31)!26 So Allah the
Exalted responded to them with His saying, “Are they the ones
who apportion the mercy of your Lord” (43:32)? And when they
said, “We found our fathers following a religion, and we are
guided by their footprints” (43:22), Allah responded to them by
saying, “(The one sent to warn them) said: ‘What, even though I
bring you better guidance than what you found your fathers
following’” (43:24)?
It is necessary to consider the universality of Allah’s
gracious favor (fa╓l), without regard for a certain time or an
individual, except in the case of someone specifically
distinguished by the Word of the Most High. In this respect (of
being distinguished by Allah), the saints followed the Prophets;
for the saintly miracle (karāma) bears witness to the Prophetic
miracle (mu’jiza), and the scholars are the heirs of the Prophets in
sanctity and mercy. Nonetheless, they are differentiated by the
extent of their endowment with Divine grace (fa╓l), so
understand this well.
Concerning Allah’s saying, “And a multitude from the
later generations (are among the companions of the Right)”
(56:40), our Shaykh (al-Tijānī), our means of access, the
nourishment of our spirits, our supporter, the saintly pole
(qu╙b), the succor (ghawth), the Seal of Mu╕ammadan
sainthood (al-khatim al-Mu╕ammadī), said: “They are our
companions!” Consider this fairly, and you will find that
Shaykh al-Tijānī acquired the complete inheritance (of the
Prophet), so that the two multitudes came to be in the Muslim

26. The “two towns” refered to here are the main cities of Arabia at the time:
Mecca and Yathrib (later called Medina).
18 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
community. One multitude belongs to his grandfather, they
being the companions of the Allah’s Messenger !. The other
multitude belongs to him !, they being his own companions.
My pen recoils from inscribing the rest of the implications
here.
In the secret of secrets are subtle details
If we were to reveal them, our blood would be shed publicly.
Know that not even those with the lowest degree of faith
can maintain the cessation of the Prophet’s spiritual support
(madad), or the waning of the light of his Prophecy. Our
Shaykh (al-Tijānī) ! said, as recording in al-Jāmi’ and alJawāhir (al-Ma’ānī):27
Know that the Prophet ! used to impose general rules on the
general populace (al-‘āma) during his lifetime. Thus when he
declared something unlawful, it became unlawful for everybody.
When he prescribed something, he prescribed it for everybody.
This was the case for all the manifest rulings of the Sacred Law.
In addition to all of these general rulings, he ! used to
instruct the elite (al-khā╗a) with special knowledge (khā╗a), and he
used to single out certain of his companions and not others for
certain affairs. This is something well-known and thoroughly
recorded in the traditional reports concerning him !.
When he was transferred to the abode of the Hereafter, the
situation was therefore the same as it had been during his life in
this world. He had begun to entrust to his community the special
command for the elite, but without modification of the general
command given to everybody. So modification of the general
command ceased with his death !, while the flood of his grace
(fay╓ahu) persisted in providing the special command to the elite.

27. The Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī wa bulūgh al-amānī fī fay╓ Sīdī Abī al-‘Abbās al-Tijānī
was written in 1799 by ‘Alī Harāzim al-Barāda, the closest companion of
Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī. The work is considered the most important
primary source of the Tijāniyya.
General Introduction
19
19
Whoever imagines that all of his support for his community
came to an end with his death !, as in the case of other dead
men, he is ignorant of the Prophet’s rank !. He is guilty of
treating him indecently, and he is therefore in danger of dying as
an unbeliever if he does not repent of his deluded conviction.
This brings us to the end of the Introduction. Praise be to
Allah, the Lord of all the worlds! Additional explanation of
this issue will come later, in the description of the shaykh who
provides spiritual training (tarbiya), if Allah the Exalted so
wills. With Allah is success on the straight path, to Him the
Glorious is the return and final destination.
Section I
23
CHAPTER 1
Concerning the Reality of Sufism
With Allah is the success for whatever I say, and He is the
Guide to the straight path.
ufism (ta╗awwuf) is a science possessing a definition
(╕add), a subject matter (maw╓ū’), a founder (wā╓i’), a
name (ism), a derivation (istimdād), a legal status (╕ukm),
particular issues (masā’il), an excellence (fa╓īla), an attribution
(nisba) and a fruit (thamara). Al-╖āwī said: “It is incumbent on
every person who would pass a judgment on a discipline
(fann) to first know (these) ten basic principles.” One of the
scholars put this in verse:
The definition and the subject matter, then the founder
And the name, the derivation, and the ruling according to the
Sacred Law
The development of particular issues, the excellence
And an attribution, (and) a sublime benefit (fā’ida)
All are a right on the student, knowing that understanding
Is comprised in these ten, the distinction in which he is entrusted
S
24 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
He must know them before beginning to seek knowledge
So that he may keep his sight on what he is seeking.
 As for its definition, Zarrūq said, “Sufism has been
defined, described and explained in approximately two
thousand ways, all of them related to the importance of
genuine dedication to Allah, and each explanation represents
one aspect of the science, but Allah knows best.” In the Īqā╛ alHimam, Junayd1 has been quoted as saying, “It means that the
Real makes you die to yourself and live for Him.” He also
said, “It means that you exist for the sake of Allah without any
other attachment.” It has similarly been said, “It is the
entrance into every sublime character trait and the escape
from every base characteristic.” And it has been said that
Sufism is when “noble characteristics appear among
distinguished people in a distinguished age.” It has also been
said, “It means that you do not possess anything, and nothing
possesses you.” And in another saying, “It means devoting
yourself to Allah with what He wants.” One of the Sufis has
said, “Sufism is not the wearing of wool and threadbare
garments, rather it is excellent conduct and character.”
Another has said:
Sufism is not wearing a robe that you patch
And it is not the shedding of tears when the singers sing
It is not crying out, nor dancing, nor musical entertainment
And it is not swooning as if you had become possessed

1. Junayd b. Mu╕ammad Abū Qāsim al-Khazzaz (d. 910) of Baghdad was
“perhaps the most famous of the early Sufis within Islam”, articulating ideas
of sobriety in mysticism and the annihilation (fana’) of the ego-self in Allah.
See Michael Sells, Early Islamic Mysticism: Sufi, Qur’ān, Mi’raj, Poetic and
Theological Writings (New Jersey: Paulist Press, 1996), p. 21-22. Nearly all the
Sufi orders, except the Tijāniyya (whose silsilah goes directly from the
Prophet ! to Shaykh A╕mad Tijānī), provide their followers with a chain of
spiritual transmission (silsilah) passing through Junayd.
Concerning the reality of Sufism
25
25
Sufism is rather your serenity (tasūfū), without distress
And following the truth of the Qur’ān and the religion.
In Īqā╛ al-Himam, Ibn ‘Ajība quoted Sīdī Zarrūq’s
commentary on the saying of our Imam Mālik:2 “If someone
practices Sufism (ta╗awwuf) without acquiring knowledge of
the law (fiqh), he has become an infidel (zindiq), while he who
practices the law without acquiring knowledge of Sufism has
become a debauched degenerate (fāsiq). He who combines the
two is on the truth.” Sīdī Zarrūq commented thus:
The infidelity of the first is due to the fact that he professes the
doctrine of fatalism (jabr), which entails the negation of wisdom
and legal rulings. The moral depravity of the second is due to
the fact that his conduct is devoid of genuine dedication that
prevents disobedience to Allah, and of the sincere devotion that
is required in all actions. The correctness of the third is due to his
sincere, steadfast adherence to the Truth. So know this: there is
no existence of Sufism except in the Law, and there is no
perfection of the Law without Sufism. This you must understand
well.
As for the subject matter (maw╓ū’) of Sufism, it is nothing
less than the exalted Essence of Allah. The science of Sufism
searches a means of knowing Him, either by demonstrable
evidence or witnessing with the eyes. The first is for the
seekers, and the second for those who have arrived. It has also
been said that the subject matter of Sufism is the souls, hearts
and spirits, since it deals with their purification and training.

2. Imam Mālik b. Anas (d. 795) is the eponym for the Maliki school of
jurisprudence. He lived in Medina, the city of the Prophet, and authored the
Muwa╙╙a, an early collection of traditions mostly with legal bearing. For
more on Imam Mālik’s role in the development of Islamic jurisprudence, see
Yasin Dutton, The Origins of Islamic Law: the Qur’ān, the Muwa╙╙a’ and the
Madinan ‘Amal (Routledge, 2002).
26 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
This definition is close to the first, for “he who knows himself
knows his Lord.”3
As for the founder (wā╓i’) of Sufism, it is the Prophet !, to
whom Allah taught it by means of both revelation (wa╕y) and
inspiration (ilhām). First, He sent down Gabriel with the
Sacred Law (al-Sharī’a), and once it had been firmly
established, He next sent down the Reality (al-╔aqīqa). Then,
the Prophet favored some of his companions with this (latter)
knowledge and not others. The first of those to speak of
Sufism thereafter and to manifest its reality was our master
‘Alī, may Allah ennoble his countenance. From him, all the
Sufis have received this science through their well-known
chains of knowledge transmission (silsila) found in their books.
The exception is our master, our patron, our Shaykh and our
means of access to our Lord, Abū ‘Abbās A╕mad b.
Mu╕ammad al-Tijānī al-╔asanī, whom Allah blessed with
receiving from the Prophet by word of mouth, without the
mediation of any of the shaykhs. Our chain of authority
derives from him.
As for its proper name (ism), it is the “Science of Sufism”
(‘ilm al-ta╗awwuf). The experts have held different opinions
regarding the origins of the name “Sufi,” however. According
to Īqā╛ al-Himam, Sīdī Zarrūq stated that its origin may be
attributed to five different sources. First from ╗ūfa, the name
for the manager in charge of the Ka’ba in Mecca, because the
Sufi is with Allah like the Ka’ba’s manager has himself been
cast away (from the rest of the world’s affairs), and there is no
planning left with him. Secondly, it could be derived from the

3. A saying sometimes attributed to the Prophet Mu╕ammad, the meaning
of which has been considered sound by numerous scholars even if its line of
transmission from the Prophet has not been settled. More discussion of this
saying can be found in Imam Sakhawi’s Maqasid al-Hasana.
Concerning the reality of Sufism
27
27
delicate ╗ūfat al-qafā, the silky hair on the back of the neck,
because the Sufi is likewise delicate and (considers himself) of
little importance. Thirdly, it may be derived from the word
╗ifa, quality or virtue, since the term is generally applied to the
possession of praiseworthy qualities and the abandonment of
blameworthy characteristics. Fourthly, it may be derived from
the word ╗afā’, pure sincerity. This statement has been
authenticated to the point where Abū al-Fat╕ al-Bastī said
concerning the Sufi:
People have differed concerning the term “Sufi,” but they have
differed only due to ignorance, for they have supposed it to be
derived from “wool” (╗ūf). I would never give this name to any
but a chivalrous one, who behaved with pure sincerity (╗āfa) and
was requited with pure sincerity (╗ūfiya), so that he came to be
called “Sufi.”
This appears to me the most plausible explanation, and
Allah knows best. The fifth possibility is that it could be
derived from the ╗uffa, the porch or bench of the Prophet’s
mosque, which was a shelter for the (indigent devotees known
as) the “people of the bench” (ahl al-╗uffa). Indeed, the Sufi
matches Allah’s description of these people: “And restrain
yourself along with those who cry unto their Lord in the
morning and evening, seeking His countenance” (Qur’ān,
18:28). So this comprehensive explanation of the origin of the
name “Sufi” provided by Shaykh Zarrūq is the foundation to
which return all statements on the subject.
As for the source (istimdād) of Sufism, it is extracted from
the Qur’ān, the Prophetic Sunnah, the inspirations (ilhāmāt) of
the righteous, and the illuminations (futū╕āt) of the gnostics.
The Sufis have incorporated elements of the science of
28 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
jurisprudence in order to substantiate the incumbent need of
the Law within the science of Sufism, and al-Ghazālī4 has
expounded this in four books of his I╕yā’ ‘Ulūm al-Dīn: the
“Book of the Rites of Worship”, the “Book of Customary
Practices”, the “Book of the Causes of Perdition”, and the
“Book of the Causes of Salvation.”
As for its legal status (╕ukm), al-Ghazālī said: “It is a duty
incumbent on every individual Muslim (far╓ ‘ayn), since no
one is free from fault or sickness, except the Prophets.” AlShādhilī5 said: “If someone does not become immersed in this
science of ours, he will die as one who persists in the major
sins, without being aware of his condition.”
As for the issues (masā’il) involved in Sufism, it is
necessary to know its technical terms and the words its people
use. These include: “sincerity” (ikhlā╗), “truthfulness” (╗idq),
“reliance” (tawakkul), “asceticism” (zuhd), “piety” (wara’),
“contentment” (ri╓ā), “surrender” (taslīm), “love” (ma╕abba),
“annihilation” (fanā’) and “remaining” (baqā’). It is likewise
important to understand words such as “Essence” (Dhāt),
“Attributes” (╖ifāt), “capability” (qudra), “wisdom” (╕ikma),
“spirituality” (rū╕āniyya) and “humanity” (bashariyya). Also
significant is the knowledge of the reality of “state” (╕āl), the

4. Abū Hamid al-Ghazali (d. 1111, Baghdad), was known the “Proof (hujja)
of Islam,” and is credited with the most comprehensive reconciliation of
Sufism with the Islamic legal tradition. His primary work is the I╕yā’ ‘Ulūm
al-Dīn, “The Revival of the Religious Sciences,” comprising four volumes of
ten chapters (or books) each. The most reliable translations are the “Ghazali
series” published by Islamic Texts Society, which has completed books 9, 11-
13, 15, 32, 34 and 37. The site www.ghazali.org has collected translations of
most of the I╕yā’s forty chapters from various sources and has made them
available online.
5. Abū ╔asan al-Shādhilī (d. 1258), the renowned Sufi scholar of Moroccan
origin who settled in Egypt and became the eponym for the Shadhiliyya Sufi
order found primarily in North Africa.
Concerning the reality of Sufism
29
29
“coming” (wārid) of mystical insights, the spiritual “station”
(maqām), and other matters.
As for the excellence (fa╓īla) of Sufism, it has already been
mentioned that its subject matter is nothing less than the
Exalted Divine Essence (Dhāt). There is no limit to the
excellence of this subject, so the science that pertains to it also
has no limit to its excellence. Its first stage deals with the fear
(khashya) of Allah, its middle stage with proper conduct
(mu’āmala) with Him and the last with the knowledge (ma’rifa)
of Him and complete dedication to Him. That is why Junayd
said, “If we knew that there was a more noble science under
heaven to discuss with our companions, surely I would have
speedily found it.” In his book Anwār al-Qulūb fī al-‘Ilm alMawhūb,6 Shaykh al-╖iqillī said, “Anyone who testifies to this
science is included among the elite. Anyone who understands
it is included among the elite of the elite. Anyone who
expounds it and speaks about it is the star that can never be
reached, the ocean that can never be drained.” Another person
has said:
If you see someone who has been opened to believing in this
Path, congratulate him. If you see someone who has been
illuminated with understanding it, rejoice on his account. If you
see someone who has been enabled to speak about it, exalt him.
But if you find someone finding fault with it, flee from him as
you would flee from the lion, and emigrate from him
completely. There is no science that cannot be dispensed with

6. The title translates as “Lights of the Hearts in Divinely-Bestowed
Knowledge.” This work by Shaykh al-╖iqillī (sometimes pronounced ╖aqlī;
the 2001 Arabic printing “Maqlī” appears to be a misprint) is also known as
Nūr al-Qulūb, the title given by Shaykh A╕mad al-‘Alawī al-Mālikī’s alRisalat al-Qawl al-Ma’ruf, where the very same passage appears.
30 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
occasionally except the science of Sufism: one cannot do without
it for a single moment.
As for its attribution or relationship (nisba) to the other
sciences, it is comprehensive of them all as well as their
prerequisite, since there is no knowledge and no good deed
without genuine dedication to Allah. So too from the
standpoint of legal validity, penalty and reward, sincerity is
the precondition in every instance. From the standpoint of the
external existence, the religious sciences may exist
superficially without Sufism, but they become defective and
disreputable. That is why al-Suyū╙ī7 said, “In relation to the
sciences, Sufism is like the science of rhetoric (balāgha) in
relation to grammar (na╕w): it perfects and beautifies them.”
According to Shaykh Zarrūq:
The relationship of Sufism to the religion is the relationship of
the spirit to the body, because it represents spiritual excellence
(i╕sān), which Allah’s Messenger explained to Gabriel by saying,
“I╕sān means that you must worship Allah as if you see Him.”8
Sufism is nothing other than this, since it hinges on the vigilant
awareness of Allah (marāqaba) after witnessing Him
(mushāhada),9 or witnessing after vigilant awareness, where no
other existence or existent beings appear to the seer (other than
Allah).

7. Jalal al-Din al-Suyū╙ī (d. 1505), famous Egyptian scholar and known as the
renewer (mujaddid) of the faith in his century. He was also an accomplished
Sufi. He authored numerous works, many of which quickly became
widespread in West Africa. Most significant has been the work of Qur’ānic
exegesis, Tafsīr al-Jalālayn.
8. ╔adīth related in al-Bukhārī, reported by Abū Hurayra; and related in
Muslim as reported by Umar b. al-Kha╙╙āb.
9. This appears to be a reference to the nine steps of traveling the Sufi path
(sulūk), where the last three comprising the station of spiritual excellence
(i╕sān) entail witnessing (mushāhada), observation (murāqaba) and gnosis
(ma’rifa). These steps are detailed in Shaykh Ibrāhīm Niasse’s Maqāmāt alDīn al-Thalāth (“The Three Stations of the Religion”).
Concerning the reality of Sufism
31
31
And as for the benefit (fā’ida) of Sufism, it lies in the
gilding of the hearts and (the granting of) of thorough
knowledge of the Unseen. Or we might say: its fruit (thamara)
is the generosity of the self, the serenity of the breast and good
disposition with every created entity.
Know that this science we mention is not mere wagging of
the tongue. Its contents are spiritual experiences (adhwāq) and
ecstasy (wijdān). It cannot be acquired through talking or
written texts, but can only be received directly from the people
of experience (ahl al-adhwāq). It can only be gained through
serving (khidma) the people of spiritual distinction (rijāl), and
companionship with the perfected ones. By Allah, no one has
ever succeeded (on this path) except by companionship with
one who has succeeded, and the achievement is from Allah.
Our master, patron and teacher, Sīdī Abū ‘Abbās al-Tijānī,
was once asked about the reality of Sufism. He responded by
saying, “Know that Sufism is compliance with Allah’s
command and avoidance of His prohibition, externally and
internally, with regard to what pleases Him, not what pleases
you.” There is no way to accomplish this without keeping
company with a shaykh who is a perfect spiritual guide. Allah
has said, “O you who truly believe, fulfill your duty to Allah,
and seek the means of access (wasīla) to Him” (Qur’ān, 5:35).
The means of access to Allah are many. Among them is
following the Prophet in his words and deeds, as Allah has
said, “Say (O Mu╕ammad), if you love Allah, follow me and
Allah will love you” (3:31); and in ╔adīth (Allah says), “And
when I love him, I become him.”10 This is the door to gnosis

10. A similar version of this ╔adīth qudsi (holy ╔adīth, where the Prophet
relays the words of Allah by inspiration, but without them being revelation),
32 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
(ma’rifa). Among the means of access is also the
companionship with the consummate gnostic (al-‘ārif al-wā╗il).
Allah has said, “Follow the path of him who has turned to
Me” (31:15). Among them as well is the perseverance in
remembering Allah, as Allah has said, “Restrain yourself
along with those who call on their Lord morning and evening
seeking His countenance” (18:28). It is well known among the
people of the spiritual path that the remembrance which
benefits its practitioner is the one received from the perfected
shaykhs.
As for the source for the phenomenon of instructing
(talqīn) the remembrances (adhkār) and litanies (awrād), it
derives from the Prophet !. It has been reported by Imam
A╕mad (b. ╔anbal) in his Musnad, with an excellent train of
transmission, and by al-╘abarānī and others, that Ya’lā b.
Shaddād said:
My father Shaddād b. Aws told me, in the presence of ‘Ubāda b.
al-╖āmit, who said he was telling the truth: “We were together
with the Prophet !, and he asked, ‘Is there a stranger amongst
you?’ By this he meant one of the people of the (preceding)
scriptures (ahl al-Kitāb). We said, ‘No, O Messenger of Allah.”
“So he ordered the door to be locked, then he said, ‘Raise
your hands and say: There is nothing worthy of worship but
Allah (lā ilāha ill-Allāh).’ So we held up our hands for a moment.
“Then he said, ‘Praise be to Allah! O Allah, You have sent
me with this declaration, You have entrusted me with it, and
You have promised me Paradise on account of it, and You do not
fail to keep Your promise.’

is related on the authority of Abū Hurayra and included in Bukhārī, where
Allah says, “When I love him, I am his hearing with which he hears, his
seeing with which he sees, his hand with which he strikes and his foot with
which he walks. Were he to ask of Me, I would surely give it to him.”
Concerning the reality of Sufism
33
33
“Then he said, ‘Rejoice, for Allah has granted you
forgiveness.’”
Ibn ╔ajar al-‘Asqalānī11 confirmed this narration with an
excellent chain of transmission reported by Imam A╕mad and
al-╘abarānī, and also reported a slightly different version,
ending with the words: “Allah’s Mesenger ! then raised (his
hands), and we raised (ours). Then he said, ‘Lower your hands
and rejoice, for you have been granted forgiveness.’”
Shaykh Yūsuf al-Kūzānī, 12 known as al-‘Ajamī, reported in
his Risāla that ‘Alī b. Abī ╘ālib once implored the Prophet, “O
Messenger of Allah, point me to the shortest of paths to Allah,
the easiest on His servants and the best in the sight of Allah.”
The Prophet ! replied, “O ‘Alī, persist in the remembrance of
Allah in spiritual retreat (khalwa).” ‘Alī then asked, “Does this
excellent merit of remembrance depend on its being practiced
by all human beings?” To this the Prophet ! replied, “O ‘Alī,
the Final Hour will not arrive so long as someone on the face
of the earth is saying ‘lā ilāha ill-Allāh.’”13
‘Alī then asked, “How should I perform the remembrance, O Messenger?” He ! replied, “You must close your
eyes and hear it from me three times, then you must say it
three times while I am listening.” The Prophet then said, “lā
ilāha ill-Allāh,” three times, closing his eyes and raising his

11. Ibn ╔ajar al-‘Asqalānī (d. 1448) was a prominent Egypt ╔adīth scholar
who authored numerous works, the most widely known being Fat╕ al-Bārī, a
commentary on the ╔adīth collection of Bukhārī.
12. This is likely Shaykh Yusuf al-‘Ajami al-Adawi, a thirteenth-century
Egyptian scholar.
13. A similar narration of this section of the ╔adīth is reported on the
authority of Anas in ╖a╕ī╕ Muslim, Sunan al-Tirmidhī and Ibn Hanbal’s
Musnad. The wording in the narration from Anas is: “The Final Hour will
not arrive while ‘Allah, Allah’ is spoken on earth.”
34 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
voice while ‘Alī listened. Then ‘Alī said the same three times,
closing his eyes and raising his voice while the Prophet
listened.
These Prophetic traditions have been mentioned as well by
the author of Kitāb al-Rimā╕ (‘Umar al-Fūtī) ,14 where it is
mentioned that ‘Alī taught these (litanies) to ╔asan al-Ba╗rī,15
who taught them to ╔abīb al-‘Ajamī16, who taught them to
Dāwūd al-Tā’ī,17 who taught them to Ma’rūf al-Karkhī,18 who
taught them to al-Sarī,19 who taught them to Junayd. They
have been transmitted since then to the masters of spiritual
training to the extent that Allah willed. So this is the source of
the instruction of the litanies and the remembrances.

14. Al-╔ājj ‘Umar al-Fūtī Tāl (d. 1864), originally of Senegal, but died in Mali
fighting Jihad against the pagan Bambara kingdoms and encroaching French
influence. He briefly established an Islamic state in what is now parts of
Mali, Senegal and Guinea. Al-╔ājj Umar was one of the nineteenth century’s
most renowned Tijānī scholars, authoring the Kitāb al-Rimā╕ hizb al-Ra╕īm
‘ala nuhūr hizb al-rajīm, since printed with the Tijānī order’s primary text, the
Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī. For more on al-╔ājj ‘Umar’s social and political activities,
see David Robinson, The Holy War of Umar Tal (Oxford University Press,
1985).
15. Abū Sa’īd al-╔asan al-Ba╗rī (d. 737) became a student of ‘Alī b. Abī ╘ālib
at a young age. He moved from Medina to Iraq, where he formed a school
and taught both juristic and ascetic sciences. Most lines of Sufi knowledge
transmission pass through him to ‘Alī.
16. Habīb b. Mu╕ammad al-‘Ajamī of Basra is mentioned in Abū Nu’aym alIsfahani’s Tadhikurat al-Awliya (v. 6, p. 149-155) as Hasan al-Basri’s closest
student, renowned for his saintliness and ability to work miracles. He was
nicknamed “’Ajamī” because he spoke Persian and had difficulty learning
the Qur’ān.
17. Abū Sulayman Dāwūd b. Nusayr al-Tā’ī (d. 790) of Kufa, Iraq, studied
with Abū Hanīfa and later devoted his entire life to asceticism.
18. Abū Ma╕fū╛ Ma’rūf ibn Firūz al-Karkhī was born of Christian parents
and converted to Islam at the hands of ‘Alī b. Musa al-Rida.
19. Abū ╔asan Sarī b. Mughalis al-Saqatī (d. 870) was the disciple of alKarkhī who elaborated on spiritual stations (maqam) and states (hal). He was
the brother of al-Junayd’s mother.
Concerning the reality of Sufism
35
35
Much has been said about the necessity of seeking the
spiritually-guiding shaykh, as the reader will discover in due
course. One poet has said:
Keep company with the shaykh knowledgeable of the ways of
seeking (masālik)
He will protect you from the dangers on the spiritual path.
You simply cannot do without a shaykh if you wish to
acquire knowledge and correct practice. A shaykh is also
necessary for acquiring the benefit of spiritual aspiration
(himma) and state (╕āl). According to al-Shamā’il,20 Anas said:
The day Allah’s Messenger ! entered Medina, every part of it
became radiant. On the day he died there, every part of it fell
into darkness. No sooner had we dusted off our hands from
burying him ! than we had renounced our hearts.
He clearly meant that the presence of the Prophet’s noble
person ! benefitted their hearts, and this is the meaning of
benefitting from spiritual aspiration and state. It is wellknown that the religious scholars are the heirs of the
Prophets,21 so seeking nearness to them is absolutely essential.
It has been said concerning them: “Whoever is afflicted by a
condition he cannot cure (himself), they will persuade him out
of it.” The author of Risālat al-Qushayriyya22 said: “The aspirant

20. Al-Shamā’il al-Mu╕ammadiyya by the great ╔adīth scholar Mu╕ammad b.
‘Isa al-Tirmidhī (d. 912) is a work of Prophetic biography (sīra). There is a
translation forthcoming by Muhtar Holland: A Portrait of the Prophet as Seen
by His Contemporaries: Ash-Shama’il al-Mu╕ammadiyya (Fons Vitae & Muslim
Literary Society).
21. This a Prophetic tradition (“The scholars are the heirs of the Prophets”),
reported by Abū al-Dardā’, and related by Abū Dāwūd.
22. This is Abū al-Qāsim al-Qushayri (d. 1072), an important Persian scholar,
famous for ╔adīth transmission, Qur’ān exegesis and his Sufi teachings. His
most influential work has been Risāla ila al-╖ūfiyya (“Epistle to the Sufis”).
For a translation of al-Qushayri’s Risāla, see Barbara Von Schlegell (trans.),
36 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
must be refined (yata’addab) by the shaykh, for if he has no
teacher, he will never succeed.” This was put in a similar way
by Abū Yazīd (al-Bistāmī): “Whoever has no teacher, his
leader (imām) is Satan.” Our master and our teacher, Abū al-
‘Abbās A╕mad b. Mu╕ammad al-Tijānī al-Sharīf, may Allah be
pleased with him, and allow us to benefit from him in this
world and the next, was asked: “Is (seeking a shaykh) strictly
incumbent on every individual, or on some but not others, and
what is the reason in either case?” His complete answer will be
presented in the relevant chapter (Section III, Chapter 2).
According to Sīdī Mukhtār al-Kuntī, the reality of the
litanies is that they are contracts and covenants, which Allah
has imposed upon His servants by means of the shaykhs. If
someone reveres the shaykhs, complies with the contracts and
fulfills the covenants, he will have the good of this life and the
next. On the other hand, if someone belittles the shaykhs and
neglects the contracts and the covenants, he will be led astray,
sinking the ship of his religion. Allah has said, “O you who
believe, fulfill your contracts!” (Qur’ān, 5:1). And He has said,
“It is most hateful in the sight of Allah that you say what you
do not do” (61:3), and, “Among the believers there are men
who are true to what they covenanted with Allah. Some of
them have paid their vow with death, and some of them are
still waiting, and they have not altered in the least; so that
Allah may reward the truthful ones for their truth” (33:23-24).
This explains why the Prophet ! would not engage in any
good work without tackling it with determination and
persistent commitment, for this is among the signs of

Principals of Sufism by al-Qushayri (Mizan Press, 1990), or Alexander Knysh
(trans.), al-Qushayri’s Epistle on Sufism: al-Risala al-Qushayriyya fi ‘ilm alTasawwuf (Garnet Publishing, 2007).
Concerning the reality of Sufism
37
37
perfected resolve. These verses of the Qur’ān have been the
source of the litanies, from the time of the Prophet to this time
of ours. The Prophet (mentioned the use of litanies), saying, “If
someone would normally perform a litany (wird) in connection
with a ritual prayer, fast, or some other religious observance,
but he is prevented by sickness, traveling or old age, he is fully
entitled to the reward.” He also said, “Venerate the shaykhs,
for reverencing them is part of exalting the Mightiness of
Allah.”23

23. A similar version of this ╔adīth has been reported by Ibn ‘Adi in al-Kamil
fi Du’afa’ al-Rijal and by Ibn al-Jawzi in al-Maw╓u’āt on the authority of Anas
b. Mālik: “Venerate the shaykhs, for surely reverence for the shaykhs is part
of exalting Allah.”
38
CHAPTER 2
The Excellence of Allah’s
Remembrance (dhikr)
et us begin with reference to the work of the erudite
scholar al-Nawawī,1 may Allah bestow His mercy upon
him, on subject of the liturgical remembrances (adhkār).
He cited the verse of Allah the Exalted, “Surely men who
submit (to Allah), and women who submit,” to the words,
“and men who remember Allah frequently and women who
remember, for them has Allah promised forgiveness and a
great reward” (Qur’ān, 44:35).2 Then he related the ╔adīth in

1. Imam Ya╕ya b. Sharaf al-Nawawī (d. 1278) was an eminent ╔adīth scholar
and Shāfi’ī jurist in Damascus. He wrote numerous books, including ╔adīth
compilations such as Riyā╓ al-╖ālihīn, works on jurisprudence such as Minhaj
al-╘ālibīn, a book on Prophetic supplications and remembrances called Kitāb
al-Adhkār (from which Shaykh Ibrāhīm cites here) and a work on inner
sincerity, Bustān al-‘Ārifīn.
2. The full verse reads: “Men who submit, and women who submit; and men
who believe and women who believe; and men who obey and women who
obey; and men who speak the truth and women who speak the truth; and
men who are patient and women who are patient; and men who are humble
and women who are humble; and men who give in charity and women who
give in charity; and men who keep the fast and women who keep the fast;
and men who are chaste and women who are chaste; and men who
L
The Excellence of Allah’s Remembrance (dhikr) 39
Sa╕ī╕ Muslim on the authority of Abū Hurayra ! where the
Messenger of Allah said: “Precedence is for those who are
singled out (mufarridūn).” The companions asked, “O
Messenger of Allah, who are those singled out?” He replied,
“The men who remember Allah frequently and women who
remember.”3 It should be noted that both mufarridūn (those
who are singled out) and mufradūn (the unique ones) have
been reported in alternate narrations; but the majority opinion
favors mufarridūn.
Pay careful attention to the true meaning of this noble
verse of the Qur’ān, which it has been the subject of scholarly
discussion. According to Imam Abū al-╔asan al-Wā╕idī:4 “The
meaning is that they remember Allah in the wake of the ritual
prayers, in the morning and in the evening, and in their beds.
Whenever one of them wakes from sleeping, or whenever he
leaves his home, he remembers Allah the Exalted.” According
to Mujāhid:5 “A person is not included among the men and
women who remember Allah frequently unless he remembers
Allah while standing, while sitting and while lying down.” He
also said:
The scholars are unanimously agreed on the permissibility of a
person making remembrance with the heart and the tongue in

remember Allah frequently and women who remember: for them as Allah
promised forgiveness and a great reward” (44:35). Shaykh ╔asan Cisse
explained in one lesson that by Allah mentioning those who remember Him
last in this verse, He means to give them precedence over the other groups
mentioned.
3. Reported by Imam Muslim in his ╖a╕ī╕, by Imam at-Tirmidhī in his Sunan,
by A╕mad in his Musnad, and by Imam al-Baghawi in Kitāb Shar╕ al-Sunnah.
4. Abū al-╔asan al-Wā╕idī (d. 1076) was a famous interpreter of the Qur’ān
from Persia who wrote Kitāb Asbāb Nuzūl al-Qur’ān, concerning the
circumstances of revelation of various verses of the Qur’ān. This book is the
likely source of the citation here.
5. Abū al-╔ājjāj Mujāhid b. Jubayr (d. 723) was an early scholar of Persian
descent who studied with ‘Alī b. Abī ╘ālib and Ibn ‘Abbās, and is said to
have authored the first exegesis of the Qur’ān.
40 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
whatever state, even in a state of ritual impurity resulting from
excretion, seminal emission, menstruation or childbirth. This
applies to the glorification of Allah (tasbī╕), the declaration of
Allah’s Oneness (tahlīl), the praise of Allah (ta╕mīd), the
exaltation of Allah (takbīr), the invocation of blessing on Allah’s
Messenger !, supplication (du’ā’), and other forms of
remembrance.
According to the distinguished scholar and divine gnostic,
Sīdī A╕mad Zarrūq !, as recorded in Ta’sīs al-Qawā’id:
The attachment to Him is found in the necessary commitment
(al-iltizām al-lāzim)6 to that for which one is liable. It is on this
premise that the remembrance is more excellent than anything
else, since your desire is for Him to be inseparable from you, so
your duty is to make the commitment to Him (to remember Him
regularly). Allah the Exalted said: “Remember Me, and I will
remember you” (Qur’ān, 2:152). There is no greater miraculous
bounty (karāma) than this promise from Allah that He will
remember us if we remember Him.
Allah has assigned a limit and a fixed period for everything
except the remembrance of Him, as is evident in the following
verses: “O you who believe, remember Allah frequently” (33:41);
“Remember Allah, while standing and while sitting” (4:103);
“Remember Allah as you remember your fathers, or with a more
intense remembrance” (2:200).
A man once said: “O Messenger of Allah, the duties of Islam
are too many for me to observe, so guide me to a deed by which
I can make up for what I have missed.” He told him: “Your
tongue must not cease to be moist with the remembrance of
Allah, to the point that they call you a crazy person.”7 The

6. The adjective lāzim (necessary, indispensible) is often used in Sufi circles
as another word for the daily liturgy (wird).
7. Reported by al-Tirmidhī in his Sunan, by Ibn Mājah in his Sunan and by
A╕mad in his Musnad.
The Excellence of Allah’s Remembrance (dhikr) 41
remembrance is the ordinance of sainthood, so who is entrusted
with the remembrance is entrusted with the ordinance.
Our Shaykh Abū al-‘Abbās al-╔a╓ramī ! said: “If the
aspirant should not encounter the spiritually-guiding shaykh, he
must practice constant remembrance and invocation of blessings
upon Allah’s Messenger !. This practice is a ladder, an
ascending stairway to Allah the Exalted. I heard one of the
righteous people narrate this from one of Allah’s truthful folk, in
the year 846 (1442 C.E.) in the Noble Sanctuary (in Mecca). Both
men were known for their reliable reporting, and Allah knows
best.”
He also said: “The special distinction of each remembrance
and Divine Name derives from its meaning, and its power (ta╗rīf)
is according to what is needed. The secret of the remembrance is
in its number of repetitions. Its fulfillment depends on the
spiritual aspiration (himma) of the one practicing it (╗ā╕ibahu).
This explains why the scholar does not benefit (from a dhikr)
unless the meaning is clear, and why the ignorant person (does
not benefit) unless the meaning is hidden and unknown to him.
In this way their (divergent) understandings persist. As for how
many times a specific formula of remembrance is repeated, this
is either taken from the legal sources, or derived by spiritual
discovery. Success is thus dependent on Allah’s established
custom (sunnat Allah).”
As for writing, and indulging in patterned formulation
(shakl) and the like, it is useful according to the knowledge of the
one writing and the natural sciences, provided it is not obscured
from the Truth or from verification. For this reason, Ibn al-Binā’
! spoke on behalf of Ibn al-Būnī8 and the like, disagreeing with
al-Nassāj and his ilk.

8. A╕mad b. al-Būnī (d. 1225) was an Arab author and Sufi, who wrote the
most comprehensive book on the Islamic esoteric sciences, called Shams alMa’ārif al-Kubra. His work has stirred controversy among Muslim scholars,
42 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Shaykh (Ibn al-‘Arabī) al-╔ātimī ! said: “The science of
letters (‘ilm al-╕urūf)9 is a noble science, but it has become
blameworthy in this world and the next, so be aware of this, and
with Allah the Glorious is all success.” As for (its
blameworthiness in) this world, the one who practices this
science becomes preoccupied with illusionary secondary causes
without verification. This diminishes his reliance on Allah, due
to the effort expended for the instrumental cause. Such is
analogous to undertaking cauterization in medical treatment, for
he bleeds himself to death while seeking to hasten the recovery.
As for (its blameworthiness in) the next world, this is because he
has occupied himself with something of little importance.
The distinguished scholar and gnostic of Allah, Sīdī
Mu╕ammad al-Yadālī10 said in Shar╕ Khātimat al-Ta╗awwuf:
It has been said that the quickest way to enter the Divine
Presence is by the remembrance, because the Name is
inseparable from the One named. Since the one engaged in
remembrance ceaselessly mentions the Name of Allah, the veils
are torn to shreds bit by bit, until the heart comes to witness
Allah directly. When this happens, the aspirant dispenses with
the remembrance due to his witnessing of the One remembered.
So this is what the Sufi people mean by entering the Presence of
Allah: the removal of veils so that you enter the Presence while
you remain sitting in your place.
He also said in Shar╕ Shahiyyat al-Samā’:

even if he claimed that he cited lines of knowledge transmission from Ibn al-
‘Arabī, Abū Madyan, and ╔asan al-Ba╗rī.
9. The technical term in English would be Arithmomancy or Numerology.
Based on the Pythagorean idea that all things can be expressed in numerical
terms, each letter is assigned a specific number which is thought to
encapsulate the inherent power of the letter and the names formed from
those letters.
10. Mu╕ammad al-Yadālī (d. 1753) was a famous Mauritanian jurist and
Shādhilī Sufi of the Daymani tribe. Besides the works on Sufism mentioned
here, he also authored an exegesis of the Qur’ān called al-Dhahab.
The Excellence of Allah’s Remembrance (dhikr) 43
A servant does not draw near to His Exalted Presence unless he
displays a deep sense of shame and bashfulness. He does not
perfect this (disposition) unless he obtains spiritual disclosure
(kashf) and the lifting of the veils; and he does not perfect this
unless he perseveres in the remembrance. Constant engagement
in the remembrance is only way to perfect the station of
complete sincerity, where one sees all actions as the creation of
Allah. There is no other means to extinguish the fire of the
internal sicknesses. There is no other way to cut off the devilish
thoughts, nor are the egocentric delusions weakened by any
other means. The continued practice of the remembrance causes
the anxiety and sadness with the world to disappear; for such
emotions are only a result of the heedlessness of Allah. Indeed,
the servant has no one to blame but himself if anxieties and
sorrows should afflict him in unrelenting succession, for these
are only the consequence of turning away from his Lord. He
who desires persistent happiness, he must devote himself to
persistent remembrance.
Some of the misguided have become stagnant, contenting
themselves with the gatherings of remembrance (majlis al-dhikr)
in the morning and evening, while remaining heedless of Allah
in between. But this practice is of no use for the spiritual
wayfarer seeking the stations of the Sufi people. Perhaps he who
contends with this will cite the Prophetic saying: “If the servant
remembers his Lord for a time (sā’a) at beginning and end of the
day, he will be forgiven whatever comes between.” Forgiveness,
however, does not include spiritual advancement. The result of
forgiveness is to equate the sinner with someone who has not
committed that sin, not to equate him with the one who has
performed acts of worshipful obedience. Understand that the
desire of the Sufi people is continuous spiritual elevation, with
each breath, through all the stations. This is achieved by the
constant remembrance of Allah, so that they do not regard
themselves as having fulfilled one atom Allah’s right on them.
44 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Ibn ‘Abbād commented on this aphorism in the ╔ikam:11
Do not abandon the remembrance for your lack of mindful
presence with Allah therein. Your heedlessness in the absence of
remembering Him is worse than your heedlessness while
remembering Him. It may be that He will raise you from the
heedless remembrance to wakeful remembrance, from wakeful
remembrance to a remembrance with presence of mind, from
present remembrance to a remembrance absent from everything
apart from the One remembered. And that is not difficult for
Allah.
He said in his commentary:
Remembrance is the shortest path to Allah the Exalted. It is the
sign of sainthood, as has been said: “The remembrance is the
edict of sainthood, so whoever achieves the remembrance, the
edict is granted him.” Likewise, whoever is deprived of the
remembrance has his sainthood withdrawn. A poet has said:
“And the remembrance is the greatest of doors you are entering;
for the sake of Allah, devote to Him every guarded breath.”
Imam Abū al-Qāsim al-Qushayrī ! said:
The remembrance is the symbol of sainthood, the shining beacon
of Divine connection, the realization of the desire, and the sign of
a sound beginning and a happy end. There is nothing besides
the remembrance. All praiseworthy qualities return to the
remembrance and originate from the remembrance.
The excellent merits of remembrance are too many to be
counted. Sufficient is the saying of the Most High in His
Mighty Book: “Remember Me and I will remember you”
(Qur’ān, 2:152). There is also His statement, Exalted and

11. The Kitāb al-╔ikam, or “Book of Aphorisms,” is a famous Sufi text by the
Egyptian Shādhili Sufi and scholar Ibn ‘A╙ā Allah al-Iskandarī (d. 1309). It
has been translated by Victor Danner, The Book of Wisdoms (Paulist Press,
1979).
The Excellence of Allah’s Remembrance (dhikr) 45
Mighty is He, narrated from Allah’s Messenger ! (in ╔adīth
Qudsī), and which scholarly consensus has authenticated:
I am alongside My servant’s thinking of Me. I am with him when
he remembers Me. If he remembers Me within himself, I
remember him within Myself. If he remembers Me in a
congregation, I remember him in a congregation better than that.
If he draws near to Me by the span of a hand, I draw near to him
by an arm’s length. If he draws near to Me by an arm’s length, I
draw near to him by the span of outspread arms. If he comes to
Me walking, I come to him at high speed.12
The scholars have said that the special merits of the
remembrance include the fact that, unlike other forms of
worship, it is not limited to a particular period of time. So
there is no time when the servant is not invited to the
remembrance, either as a matter of strict obligation or a
strongly recommended practice. According to Ibn ‘Abbās !:
Allah the Exalted has not imposed any religious duty upon His
servant without fixing a known limit to it and granting an
exception in the case of a valid excuse. The sole exception in the
remembrance, for He has not fixed any limit at which it may
end, nor has He permitted anyone to neglect it unless afflicted
by mental absence. He has commanded His servants to
remember Him in all situations, saying: “Remember Allah while
standing, while sitting, and while reclining on your sides”
(Qur’ān, 4:103). He the Exalted has also said: “O you who
believe, remember Allah with frequent remembrance” (33:41).
This is to say: remember Him by night and by day, on the land
and sea, while traveling or while staying home, while rich or
while poor, in health and in sickness, in private and in public;
indeed, in every state.

12. This “Holy ╔adīth,” where the Prophet related Allah’s words outside of
the Qur’ān, is reported in the canonical collections of Bukhārī, Muslim and
Tirmidhī on the authority of Abū Hurayra.
46 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Mujāhid ! said: “Frequent remembrance means that one
never forgets Him.” As has been related from Allah’s
Messenger !, “Make frequent remembrance of Allah, to the
point you are called crazy.”13 So the servant must practice
frequent remembrance in all states, immersing himself in it in
all of his moments, removing himself from heedlessness. It is
not permissible to abandon the remembrance due to the
presence of heedlessness in it. Indeed, if he should leave it
altogether, his heedlessness in the absence of Allah’s
remembrance is worse than his heedlessness in the course of
remembering Him. So he must remember Allah the Exalted
with his tongue, even if he is heedless in the remembrance.
Perhaps the heedless remembrance will raise him to the
remembrance absent from everything apart from the One
remembered. And this is the degree of the spiritually-realized
gnostics among the saints.
Allah the Exalted said, “And remember your Lord when
you forget” (Qur’ān, 18:24). This is to say, “When you forget
everything apart from Allah, then you will be remembering
Allah.” In this station (maqām), the remembrance of the tongue
comes to a halt, and the servant becomes erased in the
presence of the witnessing. In this context a poet has said:
I do not remember You except that an anxiety disturbs me:
My secret self, my heart, my spirit; in the presence of Your
remembrance
Until it is as if an observer is calling out to me
Woe to you, what is this remembrance of yours?
Do you not see the Truth? Its signs are shining everywhere
The totality of existence emerging from His signification has
fused with your meaning.

13. ╔adīth on the authority of Abū Sa’īd al-Khudrī reported in the Musnad of
Imam A╕mad b. Hanbal.
The Excellence of Allah’s Remembrance (dhikr) 47
Al-Wāsitī14 was referring to this station when he said:
“Those who remember His remembrance are more heedless
than those who forget His remembrance; for the remembrance
is other than He.”
In the introduction of al-Asrār al-‘Aqliyya fī al-Kalimāt alNabawiyya by Abū al-‘Izz Taqiyy al-Dīn b. Mu╛affar alShāfi’ī,15 Abū al-‘Abbās b. al-Bannā’ included the following
passage, which I saw in his own handwriting, may Allah have
mercy on him:
Among the greatest forms of the remembrance is that which
arises from inspiration received from the One who is
remembered, magnificent is His remembrance. According to the
Sufis, this is the hidden remembrance, made continuously and in
secret. As for their saying, “to the point the one making the
remembrance masters a state of immersion beyond the
remembrance,” this mastery is neither a state of incarnation
(╕ulūl) nor of theosophical union (itti╕ād), only a faculty obtained
from Him Who is Almighty, Wise.
The explanation for this is that the heart becomes, in the
presence of the remembrance, empty of the entirety of existence,
so that nothing remains in it other than Allah, mighty is His
remembrance. The heart thus becomes the house of the Manifest
Truth. Allah becomes the tongue with which the servant speaks.
If the one possessing such a heart were to strike a blow, He
would be the hand with which he strikes. If he hears, He is the
hearing with which he hears. 16 The Exalted One being

14 . Mu╕ammad b. Mūsa al-Wāsitī (d. 932) was a Sufi and jurist
contemporary to Junayd in Baghdad. This citation of his is likely from alQushayrī’s Risāla or Ibn ‘Abd al-Salām Sulāmī’s ╘abaqāt.
15. The al-Asrār al-‘Aqliyya is a work of religious principles (u╗ūl) by the
Egyptian Shāfi’ī scholar and Imam Taqiyy al-Dīn al-Maqtara╕ (d. 1215).
16. This is a reference to the well-known Sacred Tradition (╔adīth Qudsi) in
which the Prophet relates Allah’s words: “My believing servant continues to
draw near to Me, through supererogatory acts of worship, until I love him;
48 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
remembered has taken possession of the heart, so He controls it.
He has taken possession of the limbs of the body, so He uses
them for what is pleasing to Him. He has taken possession of all
the attributes of this servant, so he alternates them however He
wills for His pleasure. For this reason, the remembrance emerges
without any effort. Good deeds and obedience are undertaken
with cheerful animation and delight rather than as a wearisome
burden. “Such is Allah’s bounty, He bestows it on whom He
wills. And Allah is the Owner of infinite bounty” (Qur’ān, 57:21).
“Surely Allah is with those who fear Him, the doers of good”
(16:128).
Allah described the heart of the mother of Moses, peace be
upon him, in this sense (of emptiness): “And the heart of the
mother of Moses became empty” (Qur’ān, 28:10); meaning,
“empty of everything but the memory of Moses.”
Unintentionally, she nearly betrayed him (when entrusting him
to the care of Pharaoh’s wife) due to her involuntary
remembrance of her son. Her refraining was only the result of
Allah fortifying her heart with patient endurance. She thus was
included among the believers by what He inspired her
concerning the condition of Moses as one of the Messengers.
This accounts for the incongruity mentioned by Abū al-‘Izz,
and to which he attached great importance. Namely, the
simultaneous combination of two opposites: the remembrance
and the inattention to the remembrance. No one knows the
realities of these indications and paths of elevation except the
spiritual seekers, by way of ecstatic experience, and the religious
scholars, by way of faith and belief. So beware of denying the
signs of Allah, for then you will become deaf and dumb, left in
the darkness.

and when I love him, I become his hearing, his sight, his tongue, his hand,
his foot, and his heart; so through Me he hears, through Me he sees, through
Me he speaks, through Me he understands, and through Me he strikes.”
The Excellence of Allah’s Remembrance (dhikr) 49
The One remembered cannot be described as missing or
non-existing. No veil obstructs Him, no place contains Him, and
no time enfolds Him. Absence cannot be attributed to Him. He is
not comprehended by speech, nor can He be attributed the
qualities of created beings. Indeed, He is Present, both visibly
and symbolically. He witnesses every secret and intimate thing,
for He is Near to every single atom. He is closer to the person
remembering Him than the person is to himself, for He is
creating him, knowing him, depositing will and capacity in him,
managing his affairs and taking care of him. He has created the
creations, so their characteristics cannot be applied to Him. He
brought into being multiplicity, so its meaning does not
encompass Him. Glory be to Him, the Exalted, the Magnificent.
This ends the words of Shaykh Abū ‘Abbās (al-Bannā’),
may Allah have mercy on him, explaining the third station of
the remembrance. This station of utmost excellence and
spiritual realization points to the essential unity of the elite
within this Spiritual Path (╙arīqa). The servant should not
consider the arrival to this station out of reach or far away, for
it is no difficult matter for the Opener, the Omniscient, to
make him attain it. So let the servant occupy himself with the
necessary duties; the removal of the veil will come from Allah
the Exalted. The distinguished scholar al-Yadālī said in the
fifth section of Shar╕ al-Khātima, entitled, “Concerning the
Jewels of the Qur’ān:”
Know that the masters of spiritual insight have discovered that
the remembrance is the best of all good deeds. It has three husks,
however, one nearer to the core than the other. And underneath
the three husks is the core. The merit of the husks is only due to
their being a path to the core. The outer husk is the remembrance
of the tongue alone. The middle husk is the remembrance of the
heart. The heart requires vigilant observation to be present in the
remembrance, for if left to follow its natural inclination, it will
50 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
wander about in the valleys of thought. The inner husk is the
remembrance where the practitioner takes charge of the heart
and brings it under control, so that it may be directed where
required; (and this requires effort) just as effort was needed in
the second husk to keep the heart focused and constantly
devoted to the remembrance. Last is the sought-after core. This is
where the servant is not concerned with directing the heart’s
attention to the remembrance, or with the heart itself: he is
wholly absorbed by the One who is remembered. Whatever
appears to him in the course of this that may divert his attention
is a veil to be overcome.
The gnostics refer to this (last) condition as “annihilation”
(fanā’), because the servant has become extinct to himself. He is
not conscious of the externals of his material form, nor of his
internal disturbances. He has become absent from all of this, and
all of this has become absent from him. So he proceeds to his
Lord from the beginning to the end. Should his own annihilation
appear to him in the course thereof, this represents a blemish
and a vexation. Perfect annihilation entails the extinction from
the self, and then extinction from the extinction. So annihilation
from annihilation is the ultimate form of annihilation.
The official jurist may find this an illogical phenomenon. But
this is not the case. This condition of the Sufis pertains to their
Beloved, just as your condition in most of your states is
attributable to the object of your love; whether prestige, wealth
or lover. Similarly, when you are angry, you become absorbed in
the intensity of your anger, thinking about your enemy. When
you are filled with passionate desire, you become absorbed in
the intensity of your desire, thinking about your lover. Your
heart becomes incapable of anything else, so you speak about it
involuntarily. Somebody else may pass by in front of your eyes,
but you will not see him though your eyes are wide open.
Somebody may speak to you, but you will not hear though there
is no deafness in your ears. You are totally absorbed, heedless of
The Excellence of Allah’s Remembrance (dhikr) 51
everything, including your own absorption. Indeed, the one who
notices his own absorption has turned his attention away from
the object of his absorption.
We have enabled you to understand annihilation (fanā’), so
now you must refrain from slander and denying what you do
not comprehend. Allah the Exalted said: “But they denied that of
which the knowledge they did comprehend” (Qur’ān, 10:39).
“And since they would not be guided by it, they said, ‘This is an
ancient lie’” (46:11).
Then al-Yadālī went on to say:
Annihilation (fanā’) and total absorption (istighrāq) come first like
a lightning-flash, seldom remaining or persisting. Once the
experience does persist, becoming a deeply rooted habit and an
established condition, the servant ascends by it to the highest
realm. He becomes raised to the purest real existence. The breath
of the Heavenly Kingdom (al-Malakūt) is instilled in him, and the
Holiness of the Divine Kingdom (al-Lāhūt) becomes manifest to
him. Here, first to be presented to him in beautiful form will be
the essential natures of the Angels, and the spirits of the
Prophets and the saints. By this means, some of the realities will
make themselves known to him. This is in the beginning. Then
his degree transcends the symbolic (al-mithāl), and he encounters
the unambiguous truth in every single thing.
When he returns to this world of metaphor, which is like
shadows, he will regard the created beings with pity, pleading
for mercy for them, due to their being deprived of ascending to
the beauty of the Holy Presence. He will be amazed at their
being deceived by the world of illusion, so he will be present
with them in his person, but absent from them in his heart.
While he is amazed at their preoccupation, they will be amazed
at his absence.
And this is the fruit of remembrance’s core. The first stage of
the remembrance is that of the tongue, then the remembrance of
the heart under obligation, then the remembrance of the
52 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
obedient heart, then the servant’s occupation by the One
remembered and the erasure of the remembrance. As long as the
heart is conscious of the remembrance, it has turned away from
Allah. The heart is not rid of hidden polytheism (shirk) until it
comes to be totally absorbed in the One, the Real. So this is the
true doctrine of Oneness (taw╕īd). The same might be said of
gnosis (ma’rifa), for if someone is seeking gnosis, he has
expressed duality. Whoever finds gnosis, it is as if he did not
find it. Gnosis is found by none except by the One who is
known. So He is the One who encompasses the reality of
communion (wi╗āl) and the arrival of His loved one in the
Presence of Holiness.
This concludes the excerpts from Shar╕ Khātimat alTa╗awwuf, by the distinguished scholar al-Yadālī. May Allah
be pleased with him, and make him pleased, and may He be
pleased with us on account of him. Amen.
In his account of what is required of the aspirant by way of
spiritual discipline (riya╓a), our Shaykh and our means of
access to our Lord, the hidden saintly pole (al-Qu╙b alMaktūm), the seal of Mu╕ammadan sainthood (al-Khātim alMu╕ammadī), said:
The truthful aspirant wishing to practice spiritual discipline in
the secluded retreat (khalwa), or by other means, needs several
things. First is an awareness of the striking the proper balance.
Next is the knowledge of the goal of the endeavor, then comes
knowing how to hasten towards it. There is also the knowledge
of the veil that cuts him off from the goal, and how this veil can
be removed. Then there is the understanding of the sources of
the veil, and the effort required to cut off these sources. Then
there comes the knowledge of how to remove the veil, either
totally or partially. Lastly there is drawing the sword of
determination and mounting the stallion of struggle, in
The Excellence of Allah’s Remembrance (dhikr) 53
compliance with what he has become aware of these matters and
acting according to their requirements.
 The knowledge of striking the proper balance entails
moderation in eating and drinking, neither indulging in excess
or neglect. Also included is an awareness of the time and
location (in which to undertake spiritual exercise), with regard to
heat and cold, humidity and aridity. A person must also
consider his age, and know what will strengthen him from
falling ill.
The goal of the endeavor is the removal of the veil from the
individual’s divine spirit (rū╕) and its restoration to the state of
purity with which it was endowed before its installation in the
physical body. This is the means of realizing (idrāk) all
knowledge (‘ulūm), gnosis (ma’ārif), spiritual states (a╕wāl),
virtues (akhlāq), stations (maqāmāt), illuminations (futū╕āt),
Divine gifts, and genuine nearness to Allah. So it is through the
purity of the spirit that all happiness in this world and the next is
realized. Whoever loses this purity will not obtain the felicity of
the Hereafter.
Proceeding at a rapid pace necessitates following the
Messenger ! in the entirety of his words and deeds, and
imitating his state and his virtuous character. This is achieved by
fulfilling the rights of Allah the Exalted, secretly and publicly, all
the while sincerely devoted to Allah the Exalted, free from the
entirety of faults found in this world and the next. This must be
performed for the sake of glorifying and exalting Allah the Most
High, offering Him reverence on the carpet of good pleasure,
submission, commitment and reliance on Him in every single
thing.
The removal of the veil is dependent on quickly detaching
oneself from worldly goods and carnal lusts, desisting from
exalting their worth and hasty procurement of their benefits.
Their harmful effects can be prevented by gracious and gentle
abstinence (zuhd), rather than complete renunciation.
54 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
The causes of the veil consist of excessive eating, drinking,
social mixing, talking, sleeping and continual heedlessness of the
Allah’s remembrance, Exalted is He. These causes are severed by
hunger and thirst in gentle moderation, removing oneself from
social mixing, persistent, absolute silence except in rare cases of
necessity, keeping the night vigil in gentle moderation, and
constant remembrance of Allah the Exalted with the heart and
tongue, unceasingly, and with any form of remembrance.
The types of remembrance that remove the veils include
those that tear away the veil from the spirit completely, and
those that are partially effective, removing a veil of a particular
kind. The remembrances which are totally effective are the
following: “There is no god but Allah” (la ilāha ill-Allāh), the
invocation of blessing upon Allah’s Messenger !, “Glory be to
Allah” (sub╕ān-Allāh), “Praise be to Allah” (al-╕amdu li-Llāh),
“Allah is Supreme” (Allāhu akbar), “In the Name of Allah, the
Compassionate, the Merciful,” “Allah, Allah, Allah,” and “Allah,
there is no god but Him, the Ever-Living, Eternally SelfSubsisting.” The remembrances partially effective include the
rest of Allah’s Beautiful Names (al-Asmā’ al-╔usna). Each Name
removes one type of veil, but does not apply to another. And the
success is with Allah the Most High.
These words of his are worthy of being inscribed with
golden ink! If someone wants more information on how to tear
away the veils, in addition to what has provided here, let him
keep company with the distinguished experts on this subject.
Al-Sayyid al-‘Arabī b. al-Sā’i╕ ! said: “The Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī
contains numerous methods, all of them leading to Allah the
Exalted.” I would point out that more has been concealed that
what has been made public.17 The Director of fortune directs

17. Shaykh Ibrāhīm meant by this, said Shaykh Tijānī b. ‘Alī Cisse
(Interview, Medina-Kaolack, 21 May 2009), that the al-Fay╓a al-Tijāniyya
would bring forth more (of the secrets and remembrances of Shaykh A╕mad
The Excellence of Allah’s Remembrance (dhikr) 55
some people (to this discovery), while the Divine Averter
misguides others. As one poet has said:
The rain pours down and the earth becomes green
Whether the seeker of goodness settles there or migrates
This marks the end of the chapter. With Allah is the
success on the straight path, and to Him the Glorious is the
final destination.

al-Tijānī) than what al-‘Arabī b. al-Sā’i╕ was pointing to in the Jawāhir alMa’ānī. Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-Mā╕ī Cisse added (interview, Medina
Kaolack, 14 November 2008) that this is a reference to the various types of
spiritual retreat (khalwa) taught by Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī to his close
disciples which are not included in the texts.
56
CHPATER 3
Congregating for the Remembrance and
Awakening the Desire for Reading the
Qur’ān
With Allah is all success, and He is the Guide by His
Grace to the balanced path.
he distinguished scholar, the gnostic of Allah, the
missionary of the Spiritual Path, Shaykh ‘Umar b. Sa’īd
al-Fūtī ! said in al-Rimā╕: “Know that congregating for
the remembrance of Allah was something to which our
Prophet, the Lawgiver !, prompted and invited people. So it
has continued as the practice of the leaders of the spiritual
path among the folk of Allah, from the East to the West.”
The Prophet ! said, as reported in the ╔adīth collections of
al-Bukhārī, Muslim, al-Tirmidhī, al-Nasā’ī, Ibn Mājah, and
others: “Allah the Almighty and Glorious says, ‘I am with my
servant’s thinking of Me, and I am with him when he
remembers Me. If he remembers Me within himself, I
T
Congregating for the Remembrance 57
remember him within Myself. If he remembers Me in a
congregation, I remember him in a better congregation.’”
He ! is also reported as having said, in collection of alTabārānī, with an excellent chain of transmission: “Allah the
Magnificent has said, ‘Whenever My servant remembers Me
within himself, I remember him in a congregation of the
Angels. Whenever he remembers Me in a congregation, I
remember him among the Heavenly Host.’”
Imam A╕mad (Ibn ╔anbal) reported, on the authority of
Abū Sa’īd al-Khudrī, !that Allah’s Messenger ! said:
“Whenever a group of people gather to remember Allah,
seeking nothing but His Countenance, a heavenly herald calls
to them, ‘Arise! You have been granted forgiveness, and your
evil deeds have been converted into good deeds.’”1
In another narration, on the authority of Sahl b. ╔an╛ala as
reported by al-╘abarānī, and on the authority of ‘Abd-Allah b.
Mughaffal as reported by al-Bayhaqī, Allah’s Messenger said
!: “A group of people does not sit together for the
remembrance of Allah the Most High except that, when they
stand up to depart, they are told, ‘Rise with forgiveness
granted, and your evil deed converted into good deeds.’”2
In a ╔adīth related by ‘Abd-Allah b. ‘Umar !, Allah’s
Messenger ! came out to his companions and said: “O people,
Allah has flying columns of Angels who descend to attend the
gatherings of remembrance on earth, so graze in the meadows
of the Garden of Paradise!” He was asked, “And where are the
meadows of Paradise’s Garden?” He replied, “The gatherings

1. Reported by Imam A╕mad in his Musnad, Abū Na’īm in his ╔ilyat alawliyaa and Abū Ya’lā in his Musnad
2. Cited by al-Haythami in Majma’ al-Zawā’id and al-Bayhaqi in Shu’ab alImān.
58 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
of remembrance, so feast and relax in the remembrance of
Allah, and have yourselves remembered by Him. If someone
wants to know his position with Allah the Exalted, let him
consider Allah’s position with himself. He gives the servant
the same status with Himself as the servant gives Him with
himself.” This narration was reported by Ibn ‘Abi Dunya, Abū
Ya’lī, al-Bazār, al-╘abarānī, al-╔ākim, and al-Bayhaqī. Al-
╔ākim confirmed that it has an excellent chain of
transmission.3 As for the “meadow” referred to here, it means
delicious victuals and refreshments in copious abundance.
According to Abū al-Dardā’ !, Allah’s Messenger ! said:
“On the Day of Resurrection, Allah will bring forth a people
with radiant light on their faces, installed on pearled pulpits.
They will be the envy of all mankind, though they are neither
Prophets nor martyrs.” An Arab of the desert fell on his knees
and asked, “O Messenger of Allah, describe them for us so we
may recognize them!” He responded by saying, “They are a
people who love each other from diverse tribes and distant
lands, who join in concurrence on the remembrance of Allah
the Most High, so they remember Him.”4 This has been
reported in al-╘abarānī with an excellent chain of
transmission.
On the authority of Amr b. ‘Anbasa, ! Allah’s Messenger
! once said: “At the right-hand of the Merciful – and both of
His hands are right hands – there will be men who are neither
Prophets nor martyrs. The brightness of their faces will dazzle
the sight of the onlookers. They will be the envy of the
Prophets and the martyrs for where they sit in proximity to

3. See also al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawā’id, and al-Bayhaqi, Sunan al-Kubra.
4. Reported by al-╘abarāni, cited by al-Haythami in Majma’ al-Zawā’id and
by al-Mundhiri in al-Targhīb wa al-Tarhīb.
Congregating for the Remembrance 59
Allah, Mighty and Glorious is He.” He was asked, “O
Messenger of Allah, who are these people?” He said, “They
are a collection of people from removed tribes who are joined
in concurrence on the remembrance of Allah the Most High.
So they select the best of words, just as one picks out the
choicest of dates.”5 This has been reported by al-╘abarānī,
with a chain of transmission bearing no defect. The meaning of
“collection” (jummā’) here is a mixture of distant tribes from
various places. The meaning of “removed” (nawāzi’) is that
they are strangers. They do not gather because of nearness to
each other, or because they share a relation or because they
know each other. They only gather for the remembrance of
Allah the Most High.
Anas b. Mālik ! reported that Allah’s Messenger ! said:
“When you pass by the Garden of Paradise, revel therein.” His
companions asked, “And what is the Garden of the Paradise?”
He said, “The circles of remembrance (╕ilaq al-dhikr).” This has
been included in the collection of Tirmidhī.6 Al-╔asan al-Ba╗rī
! related that he (the Prophet) said: “The remembrance of
Allah is very good thing, without any doubt. It takes away sin
and contains no sin.” And it is related from Abū al-Dardā’ !:
“To attend a gathering of remembrance (majlis dhikr) is better
than performing one thousand cycles (rak’a) of ritual prayer,
attending one thousand funeral prayers, and visiting one
thousand sick people.” According to Abū Hurayra, ! Allah’s
Messenger ! said:
Allah has Angels who roam the streets, searching for the people
of remembrance. If they find a people remembering Allah the

5. Cited by al-Haythami in Majma’ al-Zawā'id.
6. ╔adīth reported by Imam al-Tirmidhī in his Sunan, by Imam Abū Na'īm
in Hilyat al-Awliya', and by at-╘abarāni in al-Mu'jam al-Kabīr.
60 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Exalted, they call out, “Come here to fulfill your need!” The
Angels then enfold them with their wings, one of top of the
other, reaching up to the heavens. Their Lord will ask them,
although He is well acquainted with them, “What are my
servants saying?” Their reply will be: “They are glorifying You,
proclaiming Your Supreme Greatness, praising You and exalting
You.” He will then ask, “Have they seen me?” Their reply will
be, “No, by Allah, they have not seen You!” He will then ask,
“How would it be if they had seen Me?” Their reply will be: “If
they had seen You, they would be more intensely devoted to
worshipping You, to praising You, and to glorifying You.”
He will then ask, “What are they asking from Me?” Their
reply will be: “They are asking You for Paradise.” He will ask:
“And have they seen it?” Their reply will be: “No, by Allah, they
have not seen it!” He will then ask, “How would it be if they had
seen it?” Their reply will be: “If they had seen it, their desire for
it would be more passionate, their longing for it would be more
intense, and their yearning for it would even be greater.”
He will then ask: “From what do they seek refuge?” Their
reply will be: “From the Fire of Hell.” He will then ask, “And
have they seen it?” Their reply will be: “No, by Allah, they have
not seen it!” He will then ask, “How would it be if they had seen
it?” Their reply will be: “If they had seen it, their effort to escape
from it would be more intense, and their fear of it would be
more severe.”
He will then say: “I call upon you to bear witness that I have
granted them forgiveness!” One of the Angels will say: “Among
them is so-and-so, who is not one of them. He came only because
of a certain need of his.” The Lord will say: “They are a group
whose sitting companions are never unfortunate.”7

7. ╔adīth reported by Imam al-Bukhārī in his ╖a╕ī╕, and by Imam A╕mad b.
Hanbal in his Musnad.
Congregating for the Remembrance 61
The distinguished scholar Imam al-Nawawī ! said in alAdhkār: “Know that just as the remembrance is deemed
desirable, so too is the sitting in the circle of its practitioners.
The evidence of this is clearly apparent.” He mentions some of
the Prophetic traditions cited above, then mentions this
tradition in the ╖a╕ī╕ of Muslim related by Mu’āwiya !:
Allah’s Messenger ! came out to a circle of his companions, and
asked them, “What has caused you to gather together?” They
replied: “We have met together to remember Allah the Exalted,
and to praise Him for having guided us to Islam and for the
gracious favor He has bestowed upon us!” Then he said: “By
Allah, nothing else caused you to meet together? I would surely
not extract an oath from you, implying suspicion of you, but
Gabriel came to me and informed me that Allah the Exalted is
taking pride in you before the angels.”8
Al-Nawawī also mentioned the tradition in ╖a╕ī╕ Muslim,
in which Abū Sa’īd al-Khudrī and Abū Hurayra both testified
that Allah’s Messenger ! said: “Whenever a group of people
are seated together remembering Allah the Exalted, the Angels
surround them, mercy envelops them, tranquility descends
upon them, and Allah the Exalted mentions them to those who
are in His presence.”9 In Ta’sīs al-Qawā’id, Shaykh Zarrūq !
said:
The granting of general wisdom does not require specific
substantiation for its application. This is the case for the public
recital of the remembrance and supplications, for its proof is the
Sacred Tradition where Allah says: “If someone remembers Me
in a congregation, I remember him in a better congregation.”
And its proofs also include the verse of the Qur’ān: “Remember

8. Reported by Abū Dāwūd in his Sunan, by Ibn Mājah in his Sunan, and by
A╕mad in his Musnad.
9. Reported by Muslim in his ╖a╕ī╕, by Abū Dāwūd in his Sunan, by Ibn
Mājah in his Sunan, and by A╕mad in his Musnad.
62 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Allah as you remember your fathers, or with an even more
intense remembrance” (2:200). As reported by al-Bukhārī, Ibn
‘Abbās said: “I was not aware of the people’s departure from the
ritual prayer in the time of Allah’s Messenger ! except by
(hearing) the remembrance (following the prayer).”
Public recital of the remembrance was practiced during the
‘Īd festivals, in the wake of the ritual prayers, and on the
frontiers and journeys, to the point that the Prophet ! said:
“Deal gently with yourselves! You are not calling One who is
deaf, or One who is absent. Surely He is with you. He is the AllHearing, the Ever-Near. Blessed is His Name and Exalted is His
Majesty.” 10 The Prophet ! used to publicly recite the
remembrance and supplication in numerous situations, and so
did the righteous early believers (salaf). In one authentic report,
he said in response to the companions working in the trench
during the battle of Khandaq: “O Allah! There is no goodness
except the goodness of the Hereafter, so forgive the Helpers (alAn╗ār) and the Emigrants (al-Muhājira)!”
All of this provides evidence for the public and
congregational remembrance. In special cases, however, there
may be a motive for potentially abstaining from it depending on
the circumstance. The remembrance after all is not the goal in
itself. But such special cases require their reason.
The I╕yā’ of Imam Abū ╔āmid al-Ghazālī narrates the
statement from Allah’s Messenger !: “If ever a group of
people hold a gathering where Allah the Most High is not
remembered, and where blessings are not invoked on the
Prophet !, an affliction will surely befall them on the Day of
Resurrection.” 11 Al-Ghazālī then related the following
narrations:

10. Reported by Imam al-Bukhārī in his ╖a╕ī╕, by Abū Dāwūd in his Sunan,
and by Muslim in his ╖a╕ī╕.
11. This ╔adīth, on the authority of Abū Hurayra, is also reported in the
Musnad of A╕mad b. Hanbal and the Sunan of al-Tirmidhī.
Congregating for the Remembrance 63
Prophet David, peace be upon him, said: “O my God, if You see
me passing by a gathering of people remembering You, and
heading toward a congregation of heedless folk, break my leg
before I get to them, for You have a gracious favor that You will
bestow on me.”
The Prophet Mu╕ammad ! said: “Attending one righteous
gathering (majlis) grants the believer pardon for attending two
million gatherings of wickedness.”
Abū Hurayra ! said: “The people of heaven see the houses
on earth where the Name of Allah the Exalted is remembered as
you see the stars in the sky.”
Sufyān b. ‘Uyayna, may Allah have mercy on him, said:
“Whenever a group of people gather for the remembrance of
Allah the Exalted, Satan and this lower world (dunyā) will step
aside. Satan will say to the world, ‘Do you not see what they are
doing?’ The world will reply, ‘Desist from them, for if they have
come together in harmony, they will drive you out by their
embrace.”
One day Abū Hurayra ! entered the market and said: “I see
you people here, while the inheritance (mīrāth) of the Allah’s
Messenger ! is being distributed in the mosque.” So the people
left the market and went to the mosque, but they did not see any
inheritance being distributed. They said, “O Abū Hurayra, we
did not see any inheritance being distributed in the mosque.” He
said, “Well, what did you see?” They said, “We saw a group of
people remembering Allah the Almighty and Glorious, and
reciting the Qur’ān.” He said: “That is the inheritance of Allah’s
Messenger !.”
According to the author of al-Rimā╕ (‘Umar al-Fūtī):
As reported in the Kashf al-Qinā’,
12 Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyū╙ī ! was
once asked about the permissibility of the Sufi practice of

12. The Kashf al-Qinā’ ‘an wajh al-Samā’ by ‘Alī b. A╕mad al-Kāzuwānī (d.
1548), a work that describes the practice of the Sufi spiritual concert (samā’).
64 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
convening circles of remembrance, performing it publicly in the
mosque, and raising the voice in declaration of Divine Oneness
(al-tahlīl). He responded: “There is no reprehensibility in any of
this. Some Prophetic traditions have emphasizes the desirability
of making public, audible remembrance; and some have
emphasized the desirability of making secret, silent
remembrance. When these narrations are considered together,
the conclusion is that the choice of performing the remembrance
out loud or in secret depends on the circumstance and the
person. This is similar to the conclusion of al-Nawawī when he
considered the narrations emphasizing public, audible recitation
of the Qur’ān in conjunction with those emphasizing silent
recitation.”
Al-╔ājj ‘Umar al-Fūtī also related the statement of Sīdī ‘Alī
al-Khawwā╗ on this subject:
The disciple should perform the remembrance with his voice in
full force, for this will have a stronger influence over all
segments of his heart. He should also perform the remembrance
with a congregation, for the remembrance in congregation is
more effective in removing the veils. The Exalted Lord of Truth
has likened the hearts to rocks, and it is well-known that the rock
cannot be shattered except by the combined strength of a group.
The hardness of the heart is likewise impenetrable, except by the
congregational remembrance of people gathered as a single
heart. This is because the power of the congregation is stronger
than one individual. As for the individual’s reward in the
remembrance, he is entitled to his personal reward as well as the
reward of the group’s spiritual concert (samā’).
To this I would add that they are also entitled to the
reward of the intention of the Sufi people, and their
consideration of that which focuses their hearts on Allah the
Exalted. Shaykh Zarrūq said: “The main consideration of the
Congregating for the Remembrance 65
Sufi people is that which focuses their hearts on their Lord.”
Then he said:
This explains why those who have not understood their purpose
have criticized the Sufi people on the subject of proper conduct.
They have been misconstrued by people who do not understand
their spiritual state, so their critics have fallen into error and
delusion with regard to the spiritual concert (samā’) and other
matters. When asked about the spiritual concert, al-Junayd, may
Allah have mercy on him, replied: ‘Anything that focuses the
servant on his Lord is permissible.’ As he made its permissibility
conditional on the focus (on Allah), his ruling applies to the issue
at hand, and cannot be disputed. And Allah knows best.
This passage is from Shaykh Zarrūq’s Ta’sīs al-Qawā’id.
Later in the same work he goes on to say:
The excellent merit (fa╓īla) of a thing is not its ultimate excellence
(af╓aliyya), and the rule of the moment is not the rule of the
fundamental principle (a╗l). It is not imperative to insist on
something’s ultimate excellence, or to refrain from an action
because of a temporary problem in applying the rule of the
fundamental principle. As for congregational performance of the
remembrance, supplications and Qur’ān recitation, approval of
these has been established by the Prophetic traditions cited
previously. The best practice in a circumstance may not
necessarily be the most effective absolutely; neither does the rule
of the moment indicate ultimate superiority over other things.
The superiority of silent remembrance in the time of the
Prophet’s companions must be seen in light of other acts of
beneficial worship – such as seeking knowledge, fighting Jihād
and working to earn a livelihood for their families – which
occupied their attention so that the congregational remembrance
was not performed regularly. But you should notice that
whenever an opportunity presented itself during a journey, in
the course of a campaign, during festivals, or following the ritual
66 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
prayers, they readily performed the congregational
remembrance. The preference to what is momentarily more
beneficial can be observed in the tradition relating a situation
where the Prophet ! passed by a congregational circle of
remembrance to sit with another congregation exchanging
knowledge. This was because those engaged in seeking
knowledge at that particular time were more relevant for
spreading the religion, while the congregational remembrance
was more for personal benefit. However, he never criticized the
first group, even though his actions showed the second group to
be superior in this instance. And Allah knows best.
As stated previously, the righteous folk are concerned with
focusing themselves on Allah. Our Imam, the Imam of the
Imams, Mālik b. Anas once said, “If I had known that my
heart would benefit by sitting next to heap of rubbish, I would
have done so.” Something to this effect has also been
transmitted from the exemplary behavior of the Prophet’s
companions. According to Shar╕ al-Mawāqif:13 “When ‘Umar b.
al-Kha╙╙āb ! used to see Abū Mūsā al-Ash’arī, he would say,
‘He has reminded us of our Lord.’ He used to recite the Qur’ān
with a beautiful voice, and ‘Umar used to attribute the
tenderness of his own heart to hearing his recitation of the
Qur’ān.” So there is no harm in performing the remembrance
for the sake of benefitting the heart.
As for the Sufis and some of the righteous singling out
certain nights over others for drawing near to Allah, al-Qā╓ī
‘Iyā╓ had this to say: “In the fact that the Prophet ! used to
visit the mosque of Qubā’ every Saturday, there is evidence to
support the Imams and the righteous in their assignment of

13. The Shar╕ al-Mawāqif is an eight volume work on Islamic theology
according to the Asharite school by ‘Alī b. Mu╕ammad al-Jurjani (d. 1413).
Congregating for the Remembrance 67
special properties in seeking nearness to Allah to certain days
of the week, one of them being Saturday.”
Let us conclude the subject of the congregational spiritual
concert (samā’) with the words of our Shaykh (al-Tijānī) !
from the Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī, sealing the issue at hand:
How many a gnostic has poured on him floods (fuyū╓) of
spiritual states and gnosis from the Holy Presence during the
spiritual concert! He ascends to stations to which he does not
attain by ordinary worship; and he experiences the serenity of all
the moments of one hundred thousand years (descending on
him) from the spiritual stations.
The Recitation of the Qur’ān
As for the recitation of the Qur’ān, al-Nawawī had this to say
in al-Adhkār in the section entitled, “The necessity of reciting
the Qur’ān, day and night, whether traveling or staying at
home:”
The righteous early believers, may Allah be pleased with them,
maintained various practices with regard to the complete
recitation of the Qur’ān. Some of them used to conclude a
complete recital (khatma) once every two months, while others
would do so every month. Others would conclude a complete
recital in eight nights, and others in every seven. This latter was
the practice of most of the righteous early believers (salaf).
Others would complete the Qur’ān every six nights, others every
five, others every four, and many in every three. Many would
conclude one complete recital in every day and night, and some
would conclude two complete recitals in every day and night.
Others would conclude three in every day and night. Some
would conclude eight complete recitals in every day and night:
four in the day and four in the night. Among this latter category
of people was the venerable Sayyid Ibn al-Kātib al-╖ūfi.
68 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
According to Sayyid A╕mad al-Dawraqī, 14 Man╗ūr b.
Zādhān b. ‘Abbād al-Tābi’ī ! used to recite the entire Qur’ān
between the midday prayer and the afternoon prayer. He would
also recite it completely in the interval between the sunset prayer
and the night prayer. During Ramadan, he would perform two
complete recitals and something extra in the interval between
the sunset prayer and the night prayer. They used to postpone
the night prayer during Ramadan, until one quarter of the night
had elapsed. As reported by Ibn Abī Dāwūd, with an authentic
chain of transmission, Mujāhid ! used to recite the entire Qur’ān
during Ramadan in the interval between the sunset prayer and
the night prayer. As for those who recited the entire Qur’ān in a
cycle of ritual prayer (rak'a), they are too many to be counted.
Among the companions of the Prophet they included ‘Uthmān b.
‘Affan, Tamīm al-Dārī and Sa’īd b. Jubayr.
The reasons for this wide disparity are best explained in
relation to the diversity of the individuals concerned. If someone
is accustomed to discovering subtleties and mystical insights
through the exercise of meticulous contemplation, he must limit
himself to the amount of recitation from which he gains perfect
understanding of what he is reciting. On the other hand, if
someone is preoccupied with the dissemination of knowledge
and the resolution of legal issues among the Muslims, or other
matters of importance to the religion and the general interests of
the Muslims, he must limit himself to an amount that neither
conflicts with his purpose nor impedes its accomplishment. As
for someone who is not included among those mentioned, he
must do as much as he possibly can, short of reaching the point
of exhaustion or slurring the recitation.
Some of the early authorities disapproved of the recital of
the entire Qur’ān in a day and a night, as indicated by a report
contained in the Sunan of Abū Dāwūd, al-Tirmidhi, al-Nasā'ī

14. ‘Abd-Allah A╕mad al-Dawraqī was an early scholar who lived in the
eighth century C.E. He was a contemporary of Abū Hanīfa
Congregating for the Remembrance 69
and others. According to this report, which is confirmed by
authentic chains of transmission, ‘Abd-Allah b. Amr b. al-‘Ā╗ī !
reported that Allah’s Messenger ! said: “Someone who recites
the Qur’ān in less than three days and nights does not
understand (what he is reciting).”15
As for the timing of when to begin and to conclude the
Qur’ān, it is a matter of choice for the reader. If he is one of those
who complete the recitation once a week, perhaps he will be like
‘Uthmān !, who used to begin on Friday night and conclude on
the evening of the following Thursday.16 Imam Abū Hāmid alGhazālī has said in the I╕yā’: “The most meritorious practice is to
conclude one complete recitation in the nighttime and another in
the daytime. The daytime recitation should be commenced on
Monday, during or after the voluntary prayer before the dawn
ritual prayer. The nighttime recitation should be commenced on
the night of Friday, during or after the voluntary prayer
following the sunset ritual prayer. This is to get the blessings of
the beginning of daytime and the beginning of nighttime.”
As reported by Ibn Abī Dāwūd, the noble Amr b. Murra alTābi'ī ! said: “They used to love to recite the entire Qur’ān from
the beginning of the night and from the beginning of the day.”
He also reported the saying of the noble Imam ╘al╕a b. Mu╗arrif
al-Tābi’ī: “If someone recites the entire Qur’ān at any time of the
day, the Angels will invoke blessing upon him until the evening
arrives, and if he does so at any time of the night, the angels will
invoke blessing upon him until the dawn arrives.” A similar
saying is attributed to Mujāhid.
Sa’d b. Abī Waqqās ! said, as reported in the Musnad of
Imam Abū Mu╕ammad al-Dārimī, may Allah have mercy on
him: “If one’s complete recital of the Qur’ān coincides with the
beginning of the nighttime, the Angels will invoke blessing upon

15. Reported in the Sunan of Abū Dāwūd, al-Tirmidhī, and Ibn Mājah.
16. In the Islamic calendar, each day begins at sunset, so the “night of
Friday” is the night before Friday beginning after sunset on Thursday night.
70 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
him until the dawn arrives, and if one’s complete recitation of
the Qur’ān coincides with the beginning the daytime, the Angels
will invoke blessing upon him until the evening arrives.”
As for how the Qur’ān should be completed, it has been
previously mentioned that it is recommended to conclude the
recitation during a ritual prayer. As for someone who is unable
to conclude it in a ritual prayer because, for example, the Imam’s
recitation does not give him sufficient time, the recommended
time for concluding the recitation is either at the beginning of the
nighttime or the beginning of the daytime.
In the appendix of al-Kawākib, Shaykh Sīdī al-Mukhtār alKuntī cited the statement of Abū al-Layth: “One should try to
recite the entire Qur’ān two times in the course of the year,
unless he is capable of more than that.” He then related the
statement of Abū al-╔anīfa as reported by al-╔asan b. Ziyād:
“If someone recites the entire Qur’ān two times in every year,
he has fulfilled his duty, because the Prophet ! recited it to
Gabriel two times during the year in which he died.” He also
included the tradition reported by A╕mad b. ╔anbal: “For
someone who knows the Qur’ān by heart, it is reprehensible to
postpone its complete recitation for more than forty days,
without a valid excuse, because ‘Abd-Allah b. ‘Amr asked the
Prophet !: “In how many should one recite the entire
Qur’ān?” To this he replied, “In forty days.” This has been
reported in the Sunan of Abū Dāwūd.
On this subject, Mālik b. Anas said: “It is highly
commendable to read and recite the Qur’ān regularly, for
Allah the Exalted has applauded those whose habit is the
regular recitation of the Qur’ān. He said: ‘Among the People
of the Book there are upright people who recite the revelations
of Allah in the watches of the night’ (Qur’ān, 3:113).”
According to a Prophetic tradition on the authority of Ibn
Congregating for the Remembrance 71
‘Umar and reported in the collections of al-Bukhārī and
Muslim: “Only two people are worthy of envy: one on whom
Allah has bestowed the Qur’ān, so that he busies himself with
it in the watches of the night and day; and a man to whom
Allah has granted wealth, so he becomes charged with
dispensing it for the sake of the Truth.”17
In one Holy Tradition (╔adīth Qudsī) reported on the
authority of Abū Sa’īd, the Prophet ! said: “The Lord,
Glorious and Exalted is He, says: ‘Whomever the Qur’ān and
the remembrance of Me has occupied from asking Me, I give
him better than what is given to those who ask.’ And the
superiority of Allah’s speech over all other speech is like
Allah’s superiority over all His creation.”18
According to a Prophetic tradition reported in the ╖a╕īh of
Muslim, on the authority of Abū Umāma al-Bāhilī: “You must
recite the Qur’ān, for it will serve on the Day of Resurrection
as an intercessor for its companions.”19 And the Prophet !
said, on the authority of ‘Ā’isha and reported by al-Bayhaqī:
“The house in which the Qur’ān is recited will make itself
apparent to the people of heaven, just as the stars make
themselves apparent to the people of the earth.”20 In another
tradition on the authority of Anas: “You should illuminate
your dwellings with the ritual prayer and the recitation of the
Qur’ān.”21 And in a narration on the authority of al-Nu’mān b.

17. Reported by al-Bukhārī in his ╖a╕ī╕, by Muslim in his ╖a╕ī╕, by atTirmidhī in his Sunan, and by Ibn Mājah in his Sunan.
18. Reported by at-Tirmidhī in his Sunan.
19. Reported by Muslim in his ╖a╕ī╕, and by al-╘abarānī in al-Mu’jam alKabīr.
20. Cited by ‘Alā’ al-Dīn al-Hindī in Kanz al-‘Ummāl fī Sunan al-Aqwāl wa alAf’āl.
21. Cited by ‘Alā’ al-Dīn al-Hindī in Kanz al-‘Ummāl fī Sunan al-Aqwāl wa alAf’āl.
72 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
al-Bashīr, the Prophet ! said: “The most excellent worship
performed by my community is the recitation of the Qur an.”22
There is also the narration on the authority of Samra b.
Jundub: “Every host loves his banquet to be attended, and
Allah’s banquet is the Qur’ān, so you must not stay away from
it.” 23 And on the authority of ‘Ubayda al-Mālikī is the
narration: “O people of the Qur’ān, do not treat the Qur’ān
with nonchalant familiarity (la tatawassadū), but recite it
correctly in the watches of the night and at the ends of the day.
Broadcast it widely and contemplate what it contains, for then
you may achieve success!”24
In accordance with established custom, recitation of the
Qur’ān should be performed in clean place, preferably in the
mosque. Some scholars have disapproved of reciting the
Qur’ān in the public bath-house (╕ammām) or on the road,
while others have not found objection to it. Al-Sha’bī 25
disapproved of its performance in a mill-house while the
wheel is turning. It is commendable for the one reciting to sit
facing the direction of Mecca (qibla) in a state of humility,
tranquility and seriousness, while bowing his head. The
established custom is clean the teeth before the recitation, as
an act of reverence and purification. This is due to the saying
of the Prophet !: “You must clean your mouths by picking the

22. Cited by ‘Alā’ al-Dīn al-Hindī in Kanz al-‘Ummāl fī Sunan al-Aqwāl wa alAf’āl.
23. Cited by ‘Alā’ al-Dīn al-Hindī in Kanz al-‘Ummāl fī Sunan al-Aqwāl wa alAf’āl.
24. Cited by al-Haythamī in Majma' al-Zawā'id, reported by Abū Na’īm in
Dhikr al-Akhbar, and cited by ‘Alā’ al-Dīn al-Hindī in Kanz al-‘Ummāl fī Sunan
al-Aqwāl wa al-Af’āl.
25. Qā╓ī al-Sha’bī (d. 721, Iraq) was an early interpretor of the Qur’ān and
jurist in Kufa, Iraq.
Congregating for the Remembrance 73
teeth and brushing, for they are the pathways of the Qur’ān
and the sitting rooms of the Angels.”26
It is reported that Allah the Exalted has assigned an Angel
to watch over the one reciting. When he recites, the Angel
places his mouth on his mouth, in honor of the Qur’ān. The
Angels, blessing and peace be upon them, are severely
offended by unpleasant breath, but they enjoy pleasant odors
and have a special affection for them. According to one report:
“You must use the toothbrush (siwāk), for it pleases the
Merciful and infuriates Satan. It freshens the breath,
strengthens the gums, and increases the eloquence of the
speaker.”27
The established custom is to recite the Qur’ān with
contemplation and understanding, for this is the most
significant purpose and important objective of the recitation.
‘Alī ! said: “There is no benefit in a recitation in which there
is no contemplation, because contemplation causes the heart to
expand and the mind to become enlightened.” Allah the
Exalted has said: “A Book that We have sent down to you (O
Mu╕ammad), full of blessing, that they may contemplate its
verses” (Qur’ān, 38:29). “Will they not, then, try to understand
this Qur’ān” (4:82)?
This means that during the recitation, one’s heart must be
devoted to reflecting on the meaning of what he is reading. He
must strive to grasp the meaning of each verse, and pay
careful attention to the commandments and prohibitions, with
confidence in the acceptability of what he is doing. When he

26. Reported by al-Daylami in al-Firdaws, and cited by al-‘Ajlūnī in Kashf alKhafā’ wa Muzil al-Ilbas and by ‘Alā’ al-Dīn al-Hindī in Kanz al-‘Ummāl fī
Sunan al-Aqwāl wa al-Af’āl.
27. Reported by lmam A╕mad in his Musnad, and cited by al-Haythamī in
Majma’ al-Zawā’id.
74 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
comes across a reference to something he has failed to observe
in the time of his life that has passed, he should seek
forgiveness, and beg Allah the Exalted to overlook his
mistakes. When he comes upon a verse that offers mercy, he
should welcome the good news and beg Allah for that mercy.
When he comes upon a verse that threatens torment, he
should be fearful and seek refuge in Allah. When he comes
upon a verse that proclaims the transcendence (al-tanzīh) of
Allah, he should affirm His transcendence and magnify Him.
When he comes upon a verse that invites supplication, he
should humble himself and make a request. According to a
narration reported in the ╖a╕ī╕ of Muslim, Hudhayfa ! said:
When I performed the ritual prayer together with the Prophet !
one night, he recited the Chapter of the Cow (al-Baqara) and then
the Chapter of the Family of ‘Imran, reciting in a calm and
distinct manner. When he came upon a verse containing a
glorification of the Lord, he pronounced a glorification. When he
came upon a request, he made a request. When he came upon a
plea for refuge, he sought refuge.28
In another report found in the collections of Abū Dāwūd
and al-Nasā’ī, ‘Awf b. Mālik said: “I stood in prayer with the
Prophet ! one night, and he recited the Chapter of the Cow
(al-Baqara). Whenever he came upon a verse concerning mercy,
he paused and made a request, and whenever he came upon a
verse about torment, he sought refuge.” As reported in the
Musnad of Abū Dāwūd and the ╖a╕ī╕ of al-Tirmidhī, the
Prophet ! said:
When someone recites the Chapter of the Qur’ān, “By the fig and
the olive” (Chapter 95) and gets to the last verse, “Is not Allah

28. Reported by Muslim in his ╖a╕ī╕, by al-Nasā’i in his Sunan, and by Imam
A╕mad in his Musnad.
Congregating for the Remembrance 75
the fairest of judges?” he should say: “Yes indeed, and I am one
of those who bear witness to that!”
Likewise, when someone recites the Chapter, “No! I swear
by the Day of Resurrection” (Chapter 75), and gets to the last
verse: “Is He not Capable of bringing the dead to life?” let him
say: “Yes indeed!”
And whenever someone recites the Chapter: “By the winds
sent one after another” (Chapter 77), then gets to the end: “In
what statement, after this, will they believe?” Let him say: “We
believe in Allah and His Messenger and His Angels, and in what
He has revealed in His Book!”
As reported in the collections of A╕mad (Ibn ╔anbal) and
Abū Dāwūd, on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbās: “When the
Prophet used to recite the verse: ‘Glorify the Name of your
Lord the Most High’ (Qur’ān, 87:1), he used to say, ‘Glory to
my Lord the Most High!’”
When Ibn Mas’ūd recited the Qur’ān to the Prophet !, as
reported in the collections of al-Bukhārī and Muslim, the
Prophet’s eyes would overflow in tears. On the authority of
Sa’d b. Mālik and reported in the Shu’ab al-Īmān,29 the Prophet
! said: “This Qur’ān has come down with sorrow and grief, so
weep when you recite it, and if your weeping does not come,
force it to come.” According to ‘Abd al-Mālik b. ‘Umayr: “One
day Allah’s Messenger ! came out to his companions and
said, ‘I am reciting a Chapter of the Qur’ān to you; if someone
weeps, the Garden of Paradise is for him, and if you do not
weep, then try to weep!” In the Musnad of Abū Ya’lī30 is the

29. The Shu’ab al-Īmān (“The Branches of Belief”) was the multi-volume work
of Imam al-Bayhaqi discussing the ╔adīth, “Belief has seventy-odd
branches.”
30. This is the multi-volume collection of ╔adīth by Abū Ya’lī (or Ya’lā) alMawsili (d. 919).
76 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
narration: “Read the Qur’ān with sadness, for it has come
down in sadness.”31 Among the traditions included by al-
╘abarānī is the following: “The best of those who read the
Qur’ān are those who, when they read the Qur’ān, they
discuss it among themselves.”32
Weeping from reading the Qur’ān is caused by
contemplating the meaning of what is being recited. This
includes the threats and dire warnings, the covenants and the
promises. The one reciting the Qur’ān should reflect on his
own shortcomings in these respects. If this does not afflict him
with sorrow and weeping, let him weep for himself on account
of distance from the Truth and the lack of his humility, for this
is itself a calamitous misfortune.
The Qur’ān is properly recited in a distinct and measured
manner, according to the Allah’s saying, “And recite the
Qur’ān in a distinct and measured manner” (Qur’ān, 73:4).
Umm Salama described the recitation of Allah’s Messenger !
as a measured recitation, pronounced letter by letter. This has
been reported by Sunan of Abū Dāwūd.33
Concerning the collective performance of the Qur’ān
recitation by a whole congregation, either in unison or when
members recite different sections at once, Shaykh Sīdī alMukhtār (al-Kuntī) said that there is no legal objection to this.
On this subject, it has been said concerning the practice (of
collective recitation) in Fes: “And the remembrance, together
with the recitation of the Qur’ān in congregation, has become

31. ╔adīth cited by ‘Alā’ al-Dīn al-Hindī in Kanz al-‘Ummāl fī Sunan al-Aqwāl
wa al-Af’āl.
32. ╔adīth cited by al-╘abarānī, al-Mu’jam al-Awsa╙, al-Haythamī in Majma’
al-Zawā’id and ‘Alā’ al-Dīn al-Hindī in Kanz al-‘Ummāl fī Sunan al-Aqwāl wa
al-Af’āl.
33. It is also reported by at-Tirmidhī in his Sunan, by Abmad in his Musnad,
and by Imam al-╘abarānī in al-Mu’jam al-Kabīr.
Congregating for the Remembrance 77
widespread since long ago.” In one poem, Sīdī Mu╕ni╓ Bāb alDaymānī al-Tijānī34 ! said:
They denounced the public openness and congregation in the
remembrance
Even though it is permissible by the consensus of the scholars
The consensus has been established after disagreement
So today it is permissible without any disagreement.
Concerning the merit of reciting the Qur’ān, our Shaykh alTijānī, the Seal of Saints, had this to say in al-Kunnāsh:35
As for the external portion of the hidden, internal degree – that
being the recitation (tilāwa) of the Qur’ān – it relates to the
Supreme Assembly, in which there is no ‘where,’ no ‘how,’ and
no demarcation. There is only the immersion in the Divine and
the Eternal Secret, which cannot be analyzed or known, which
no expression captures and no signification realizes. The holder
of this degree of the Qur’ān comprehends all remembrance of
our Lord, on the tongues all creatures, in the eternal past and
eternal future. The means, goal and end of this degree of
recitation are not understood or realized except by its holder,
who is the Prophet ! alone.
The reward for reciting the Qur’ān is allotted by degrees
according to the ranks of the creation concerned. The degree of
the one who is veiled is not the same as the one for whom the
secrets of lesser sainthood has been opened. The degree of this
lesser saint (al-walī al-saghīr) is not like that of the gnostic (‘ārif),

34. Mu╕ni╓ Bāb al-Daymānī al-Tijānī was a nineteenth-century Tijānī scholar
from the Daymānī tribe of Mauritania. He may have been the same
Mu╕ammad Baba al-Daymani who was one of the teachers of Ousmane Sy,
the father of al-╔ājj Mālik Sy.
35. The Kunnāsh is the term for a collection of secret prayers or papers
belonging to a certain Shaykh. But in this case, the Kunnāsh seems to be
another word for the Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī itself; although we have not located
this exact passage in the Jawāhir. It is likely Shaykh Ibrāhīm refers here to a
manuscript from the time Shaykh al-Tijānī, perhaps the original manuscript
of the Jawāhir known to have been in possession.
78 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
who has attained the rank of the most truthful (siddīqiyya). And
the degree of this gnostic is not like that of the unique and
comprehensive saintly pole (qu╙b). The reward for recitation at
each of these degrees reaches a certain limit. At every degree
there is an external reward and an internal reward. As for the
external one, it is mentioned tradition. Namely, whoever recites
the Qur’ān without ablution (wudhū’), he is credited ten good
deeds for every letter (he pronounces). Whoever recites with
ablution, but outside of the ritual prayer, he is credited twentyfive good deeds for every letter. Whoever recites with ablution,
while sitting in the ritual prayer, he is credited with fifty good
deeds for every letter. Whoever recites with ablution while
standing in the ritual prayer, he is credited with one hundred
good deeds for every letter. Such is the degree of the external
aspect.
As for the degree of the inner aspect, it is beyond definition
and likeness. It cannot be measured or quantified, and its
essential nature is inaccessible for all eternity to the entirety of
created beings. Even if all the liturgical remembrances were
combined, with all the Names, with all the Attributes, with all
the good deeds, with all the acts of devotion from the beginning
of time till the end, it would fall short of one single letter of the
Qur’ān. This is the internal degree.
This concludes what we wanted to gather in this chapter.
With Allah is the success on the straight path, and to Him, the
Glorious, is the return and final destination.
Section II
81
CHAPTER 1
Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within
the Tijāniyya
t has been a matter of general consensus among the
companions of the Saintly Seal, Shaykh A╕mad Tijānī !,
and a topic of frequent discussion by the authors of the
books of his Spiritual Path that the Shaykh said: “A flood
(fay╓a) will come upon my companions, and people will enter
our Spiritual Path group upon group. This Fay╓a will come
when people are in their utmost state of distress and
hardship.”1 According to (al-╘ayyib al-╖ufyānī) the author of
the Ifāda: “What he meant by Fay╓a was that many of his
companions would obtain spiritual illumination (fat╕), but he
used to consider its time remote.”

1. This statement of Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī appears in the Ifāda alA╕madiyya li murīd al-sa’ada wa al-‘abadiyya, a collection of the Shaykh’s
saying authored by his companion, Mu╕ammad al-╘ayyib al-╖ufyānī (d.
1843).
I
82 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Sīdī ‘Alī Harāzim al-Barāda, the closest disciple (khalīfa) of
Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī, reported in Risalāt al-Fa╓l wa alImtinān:2
Our Shaykh said that among the assurances given him by
Allah’s Messenger was that the Prophet’s support would remain
with the Shaykh’s disciples until the advent of the Final Hour.
He ! also said that among the children of Adam, the Shaykh’s
Spiritual Path (╘arīqa) would exceed ten thousand paths (╙arīq),3
each one of them headed by one of the Shaykh’s disciples. Each
path would branch into many paths of gnosis (ma’rifa), and then
each of these paths would also branch into more paths until the
advent of the Hour. The Spiritual Path will consist of more than
twenty thousand paths among the Jinn, branching into many
more branches until the advent of the Hour, and this will not
end until Allah inherits the earth and everything on it. Indeed
He is the best of inheritors. And the Tijānī litany (wird), so long
as it is remembered and recited, will retain its special quality
until the advent of the Hour.
This Fay╓a mentioned by our Shaykh has also been
discussed by his companions, deputies and those who
inherited his secrets after him. Many of them claimed it for
themselves, and they spoke about it, but their words became

2. The Risalāt al-Fa╓l wa al-Imtinān ila kāffat al-A╗hāb wa al-Ikhwān (“The Letter
of Grace and Gratitude to the entirety of the companions and brothers”) of
‘Alī Harāzim is a lengthy epistle written in 1803 discussing various details of
the Tijānī Path. It has been translated in draft form by Mu╕ammad Bokreta
al-Hassani (2007).
3. According to Shaykh Tijānī ‘Alī Cisse (interview 23 December 2008,
Medina Kaolack, Senegal), this statement does not mean that the Tariqa
Tijāniyya would fracture into several subsidiary orders as in the case of
other Sufi orders such as the Shadhiliyya (Nasiriyya, Hamdiyya,
Darqawiyya, Maryamiyya, etc) or the Qadiriyya (Qadiriyya-Rifa'iyya,
Muridiyya, Uthmaniyya, etc). Each tariq, or branch, adds nothing to the
litany of the Tijāniyya. The reference here is to coming of a multitude of
charasmatic personalities within the Tijāniyya who attract disciples and
continue to spread the Tariqa.
Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within the Tijāniyya 83
convoluted. I have happened upon some questions the scholar
A╕mad b. Ma╕amm al-‘Alawī once asked Shaykh ‘Umar alFūtī,4 may Allah be pleased with them both. The third of these
questions concerned the saying of Shaykh Tijānī: “A Fay╓a will
come upon my companions, so people will enter our Spiritual
Path group upon group. This Fay╓a will come when people are
in their utmost state of distress and hardship.” Shaykh ‘Umar
was asked, “Has this Fay╓a already arrived, or does it remain
to come?” Shaykh ‘Umar responded: “As for the Fay╓a, I hope
from Allah for your sakes that I am its intended target, poor
servant that I am; and the Fā╙imid Imam !.”5 I also discovered
some commentary of Shaykh al-‘Arabī b. al-Sā’i╕ on these
responses by Shaykh ‘Umar. He ! said:
As for Shaykh ‘Umar’s saying, “I hope from Allah...” in response
to the question concerning our master’s saying, “A Fay╓a will
come...,” we have observed that those distinguished companions
of Shaykh Tijānī whom we have encountered disagree as to
whether or not the Fay╓a has yet arrived. Those inclined to
believe it has arrived say, “It is that which arrived in the regions

4. Al-╔ājj ‘Umar al-Fūtī Tāl (1797-1864) was a Tijānī scholar from Futa Toro
(Senegal) influential in spreading Islam and the Tariqa Tijāniyya in
nineteenth-century West Africa through his writings and through armed
Jihad. He was the author of the Rimāh, one of the most important works of
the Tijāniyya. A╕mad b. Ma╕amm b. al-‘Abbās al-‘Alawī al-Shinqītī was a
prominent Mauritanian scholar who studied with many of the companions
of Shaykh al-Tijānī and became a companion of al-╔ājj ‘Umar. He was the
author of Rawd Shamā’il Ahl al-Haqīqa fī al-Ta’rīf bi Akābir al-Tarīqa, an early
biography of the prominent scholars of the Tijāniyya. For more on this work,
see Mu╕ammad al-Muntaqī A╕mad Tāl, al-Jawāhir wa al-Durar fī sīra alShaykh al-Hāj ‘Umar (Beirut: Dar Albouraq, 2005), especially p. 553-561.
A╕mad b. Muhimm’s son, Mu╕ammad al-Kabir, was among those who
granted Shaykh Ibrāhīm Niasse absolute license (ijaza mutlaqa) in the
Tijāniyya.
5. This is a reference to the Mahdi, the awaited “rightly guided one” of
Islamic eschatology whose coming will presage the arrival of the Antichrist
and Jesus.
84 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
of Shinjīt, at the hand of Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛ !.” But
others say, “It has not yet arrived, because the Shaykh said,
‘People will enter our Spiritual Path group upon group.’ He did
not limit this to any particular town or district.” All are in
agreement that its time is far. Our own understanding, based on
what has come to us from the Shaykh, is that it has not arrived
until now, and that its arrival will coincide with the appearance
of the awaited Mahdi, when all the spiritual paths will become
one. And Allah knows best.
Allow me to point out here that people have now entered
the ╘arīqa group upon group. And perhaps the other spiritual
paths have even been abrogated, since not one of them is
maintained by someone capable of providing spiritual training
(tarbiya). Moreover, this present time has witnessed
unprecedented distress and hardship, never before witnessed
by the eminent elders of whom we are aware. As for the
abundance of spiritual illumination (fat╕) among the
companions of Shaykh Tijānī – and the gnosis (ma’rifa) of
Allah and absorption (istighrāq) in Him to the exclusion of
everything apart from Him – nothing like it has ever occurred
in our ╘arīqa, to the best of my knowledge, from its beginning
to our present time. “Such is the grace of Allah, He bestows it
on whom He wills” (Qur’ān, 57:21).
The knowledgeable one of Allah, Sīdī Mu╕ammad al-Hāfi╛
b. Khayr al-’Alawī,6 once claimed the Fay╓a for himself, and
alluded to the qualities of its possessor in verse:
Suppose that I am the one to appear
From among the foremost of those in command
The one who will bring forth the Fay╓a near the End of Time

6. Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛ b. Khayr al-‘Alawi was a Mauritanian scholar and
elder contemporary of Shaykh Ibrāhīm who renounced his claim to the
Fay╓a in favor of the Shaykh.
Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within the Tijāniyya 85
He is the foremost among men in knowledge of the Qur’ān
His ordinance has singled me out, at the age of thirty7
And by me have hearts been awakened from slumber.
My shaykh and master, the greatest shaykh, rare like the
red sulfur, al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah b. al-╔ājj !,8 likewise claimed
the Fay╓a for himself. He received spiritual unveilings
concerning the Fay╓a, and he perceived that it belonged to
himself. He started seeking for it among all the (Tijānī)
disciples he encountered. When he found his death near at
hand and it had not yet descended, he knew that it was being
held for his disciples.9 So he began to appoint many deputies,
hoping to serve as the means of access to the Fay╓a; and that
was the cause of his wandering. Concerning this he said things
which cannot be written on pages or seen with the eyes.
Evidence for the Fay╓a is found in the Qur’ān. The Most
High said: “Such of Our Signs as We abrogate or cause to be
forgotten, We replace with one better than it or as good”

7. The reference to the ╖a╕ib al-Fay╓a being thirty years old at the time of his
appearance was in fact fulfilled by Shaykh Ibrāhīm himself. In one letter the
Shaykh wrote: “And you may know that the Shaykh (al-Tijānī) ! mentioned
a fay╓a would appear in the latter days, and some of the people of spiritual
unveiling (kashf) from the disciples of Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛ have
said that the Imām al-Fay╓a will be thirty years old (when he appears). So
understand my indication” (Jawāhir al-Rasā’il, v. II, p. 144). Thanks to
Fakhruddin Owaisi for pointing this out to us.
8. Al-╔ājj Abd-Allah b. al-╔ājj al-‘Alawī (d. 1927) was a renowned scholar
and gnostic from Mauritania who traveled widely in the Senegambian
region, frequently visiting al-╔ājj Abd-Allah Niasse. His silsila passes
through Shaykh A╕mad b. Baddi (known as “Abba,” d. 1905), to his father
Shaykh Muhamdi “Baddi” (d. 1855), the most prominent disciple of Shaykh
Mu╕ammad al-Hafiz b. al-Mukhtār (d. 1830). He was especially famous for
his expertise in the science of gnosis (ma’rifa). Al-╔ājj Abd-Allah wuld al-
╔ājj was the father of Mu╕ammad (known as “al-Mishri”), the father of the
current Shaykh of Matamawlana (Mauritania), al-╔ājj Abd-Allah Mishri.
9. Meaning that he believed he would not live to see its appearance.
86 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
(2:106). “Allah will surely bring a people whom He loves, and
who love Him” (5:54). “We will entrust it with a people who
will not be disbelievers therein” (6:89). “As well as others
among them who have not yet joined them” (62:3). “When the
help of Allah comes, and victory, and you see the people
entering the religion group upon group, then proclaim the
praise of your Lord and seek His forgiveness; for He is OftRelenting” (110:1-3). “And He creates that which you do not
know” (16:8). Here are indications confirming what has been
presented (concerning the Fay╓a) for those whom Allah has
given light to see. But you may draw your own conclusions.
As for (evidence from) the Sunnah, the Messenger of Allah
! said, “There will come a time when the one doing good
deeds will have the reward of fifty.”10 His companions asked,
“(Fifty) of us, or of them, O Messenger of Allah?” He said, “Of
you!” His saying, “There will remain a group in my
community...” and his saying “My community is like the
rain...” have already been discussed at length.11 He also said,
“The best of my community is the first of it and the last of it, in
the middle there is trouble.” And he said, “By Him in whose
hand is my soul, Jesus the son of Mary will surely acquire in
my community inheritors of his disciples.” Were we to cite all
the relevant Prophetic traditions and discuss their
implications, we would require a separate work.
My dear brother: if you have not grasped the essential
realities of the Qur’ānic verses and Prophetic traditions cited
here, let that not stop you from accepting them. Shaykh
A╕mad Tijānī said in Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī:

10. ╔adīth reported by Abū Dāwūd, al-Tirmidhī and Ibn Mājah.
11. See Shaykh Ibrāhīm’s Introduction to the present work.
Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within the Tijāniyya 87
My dear brother: you must believe in and submit to this (Sufi)
order (╙ā’ifa). Do not imagine that its method of interpreting the
Qur’ān and the Sunnah is only changing one apparent meaning
for another. Surely the apparent meaning of a Qur’ānic verse or
Prophetic tradition has an understanding suited to the people
and their varying capacities to understand. In this case, the
understanding is determined by the wording of the verse or
tradition: thus what the words signify in ordinary linguistic
usage.
But there are other, hidden understandings of Qur’ānic
verses and ╔adīth, understood by those to whom Allah has
granted illumination (fat╕). It is reported in one Prophetic
tradition, “Every Qur’ānic verse has an external meaning, and a
hidden meaning; as well as an ending point and an insight into
seven or seventy secrets.”12 The apparent meaning is that which
is logical, which is transmitted by the practical sciences
concerned with righteous conduct. The hidden meaning pertains
to Divine gnosis. Insight refers to when the apparent and hidden
meanings become united in one meaning. The ending point is a
way of witnessing that is both universal and personal.
Understand this well, dear brother, and do not let the speech
of the quarrelsome protestors deter you from accepting
meanings from this noble (Sufi) group, even if they are foreign to
the minds of common folk. They say this is distorting the words
of Allah and His Messenger, but it is not so. It is as if they want
to say, “There is no meaning to the noble Qur’ānic verse or
Prophetic tradition except what we give it.” But of course, they
will not admit this. In fact, they are only privileging the external
meanings over the internal meanings for specific purposes. They
understand in their ego-selves what Allah permits them out of
His grace. The opening of their hearts is (only) by His mercy and
kindness.

12. ╔adīth traceable to the al-Itqān of Imam al-Suyū╙ī.
88 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
There is Divine wisdom for the appearance of the Fay╓a in
this age of corruption. Faith has become weak in the hearts of
men. Erring sects, misguided and misguiding others, have
proliferated. But know that Allah has mercy for this
community of Islam, and He has poured out gnosis and
essential realities (╕aqā’iq) so that the Muslims may return to
the original, pure state of faith. On this subject, the Greatest
Shaykh, Sīdī al-Mukhtār al-Kuntī reported in al-Kawkab alWaqqād:
Imam al-╔aramayn13 said: “When the errant sects multiply,
arousing themselves in rage, he whom Allah has protected in
this Mu╕ammadan community becomes a guardian for the
minds of the Muslims, focusing them on the affirmation of
Divine Oneness (taw╕īd) and delivering them from their
contentment with convention (taqlīd). He will actualize the
gnosis (‘irfān) of their innermost beings with a most beautiful
support. Protection in the full sense does not mean the servant
protects himself from affliction. Rather, real protection is the
guarding of his heart from passionate desires.”
Once you have understood this, know that a man may
obtain a spiritual station (maqām) through the affirmation of
Divine Oneness in which those who have no experience of it
may think he is possessed (majnūn). But he is not possessed.
Those with no understanding may consider him an atheist
(zindiq), though he is no less than one of Truth’s champions
(╗iddīq). According to Shaykh Sīdī al-Mukhtār Kuntī, al-Junayd
was reported as saying:
Whoever worships Allah, and truly affirms His Oneness, Allah
will enthrall him, single him out and choose him for Himself. He

13. ‘Abd al-Mālik Abū al-Ma'ali al-Juwayni al-Shāfi'ī (d. 1085, Hijaz), known
as Imam al-Haramayn, was one of the most famous scholars of the Asharite
school of theology. He was also the teacher of Abū Hāmid al-Ghazālī.
Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within the Tijāniyya 89
will separate him from his kind, making him a unique individual
seeking only Him who is Unique. No possessed madman among
the gnostic sages goes mad except by drinking the wine of
Divine Majesty. His Divine Majesty bewilders the lovers, and
His Divine Beauty confounds the gnostic sages. He presents His
Perfection to those who have arrived in the Divine Presence, and
it is He Who interprets His Names, He Who is the Source of all
benefit, the Aggregate of all the Divine Names.
The lovers disagree concerning His Majesty according to
their spiritual states. Among them is one whose mind becomes
overwhelmed by the intense lights of his state, so delirium
becomes manifest in his actions. He appears to have gone mad to
one with no spiritual experience, but he is not crazy. Those who
lack understanding suspect him of being an atheist, but in
actuality he is Truth’s champion (╗iddīq). He has only drunk the
wine of Divine Majesty and thereby become intoxicated. Let
there only be hostility to the evil doers, not to such a one as
mentioned here. One of the enraptured described his spiritual
state in verse:
And say to him who condemns the people of ecstasy
If you have not tasted the drink of passion, leave us alone
For when we have become joyful and light-headed,
Intoxicated by the wine of ardent yearning – you will put us
to shame
So do not blame the drunkard in his state of drunkenness
For burdensome ceremonials are lifted from us in our
intoxication
How could we insist on patience from a woman filled with
desire?
How can one bear patience when he is witnessing the real
meaning?
O driver of the ardent lovers, come to the aid of the
conspicuous one
90 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Sing for us in the Name of the Beloved, and cheer our spirits
Preserve our secret in our drunkenness from those who envy
us
And if you see something unworthy, forgive us.
Their stories move us, but if not for their passion
Burning inside, such reports would not affect us
Young man: have you not seen the caged bird?
When native lands are mentioned, it longs for its home
So it condoles itself giving song to the contents of its heart
The abdomen shakes only with feeling and meaning
O young man! So too the spirits of the lovers:
They are moved by ardent yearning for the realm of
radiance.
Ya╕yā b. Mu’ādh al-Rāzī14 said:
If the tongues of the gnostics were to wander around with the
people the same way their hearts revolve with Allah, they would
surely be called mad. They might describe their condition in
verse as follows:
Wherever the wineglass goes around, around we go
The ignorant think we have been possessed
But we have not been possessed, nor do we suffer insanity
We have simply drank wine and become drunk.
Those drawn near to Allah are distinguished by increased
affirmation of Divine Oneness. In this regard, it is sufficient to
cite the words of the poet:
I was asked, “Have you ever seen anything more beautiful?”

14. Abū Zakariya Yahya b. Mu’ādh al-Rāzī (d. 871) was an eminent early
Sufi of Central Asia. He allegedly wrote several treatises on Sufism, but his
words are mostly related through such early Sufi compendiums as the Risāla
of Qushayri or the ╘abaqāt al-╖ufiyya of al-Sulāmī. See N. Hanif, Biographical
encyclopedia of Sufis: Central Asia and Middle East (Sarup & Sons, 2002), p. 371-
372.
Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within the Tijāniyya 91
I said, “Is there anything else but this in existence?”
If you were to follow the indications of Divine Oneness
from us and the Sufi people, we would have escaped from our
present situation (requiring explanation).
So let us now give free reign to the discussion of Fay╓a, its
occurrence, and what has been said by the venerable Shaykhs
of our time. The magnanimous Shaykh and gnostic sage, the
Imam and master, ‘Abd-Allah b. al-╔ājj al-’Alawī, told me:
“The Fay╓a is coming at your hand, in actuality, not
figuratively. You will see such jealously as never witnessed
before you.” And he told me: “You are the glory of the Tijānī
Spiritual Path in your time,” as well as other things that
modesty prevents my pen from recording. His speech derives
from the purity of his thoughts in regards to Allah and His
servants, may it be displayed on yet another occasion. As it is,
I am nothing but a delinquent servant, stained with sins and
offenses.
Among those who were certain of the arrival of the Fay╓a
mentioned by the gnostic Shaykh (al-Tijānī) was the scholarly
master Mu╕ammad b. al-Shaykh A╕mad b. al-Shaykh
Mu╕amdi Baddi,15 who was known as the ╔assān of the Tijānī
Path. He was admired by the finest of his age, whose grace
outshone pearls and exquisite coral. All indications are that he
is endowed with the greatest sainthood. He annihilated
himself in the love of his Master, the Merciful, the
Compassionate, and plunged into the oceans and spiritual

15. Shaykh Mu╕ammad b. A╕mad b. Mu╕amdi(d. c. 1955) was the inheritor
and descendent of Muhamdi Baddi b. Sīdina (d. 1855), the closest disciple
and khalifa of Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛ al-Shinqiti (d. 1830), who first
brought the Tijāniyya to Mauritania. He was known as the “╔assān of the
╘arīqa” after the poet ╔assān, famous for his eloquence in the time of the
Prophet.
92 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
presences of the best of the children of Adnān. So he became
crowned with the secrets of the Seal of Saints, indeed, the
finest of crowns.
Such names cannot comprehend the knowledge of him
We only mention them for the sake of pleasure.
The splendid master and venerable erudite scholar,
Mu╕ammad ‘Abd al-Ra╕mān b. al-╔ājj ‘Alawī, was also
among those certain of the Fay╓a’s arrival. He is the holder of
the most holy secret and most valuable of spiritual stations,
the successor of the righteous early believers (salaf). I have
mentioned him elsewhere.16 There is also the famous signpost
and brightest full moon, the greatest shaykh, more rare than
red sulfur, Mu╕ammad b. Shaykh A╕mad b. Shaykh
Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛. 17 No one doubts his sainthood on
account of his abundant gnosis, his righteousness, the power
of his narration and the depth of his understanding.
Less explicit in regards to the Fay╓a were the two greatest
shaykhs, the most famous supports, the inheritors of Shaykh
Tijānī, Shaykh Mu╕ammad Sa’īd b. Shaykh A╕mad b. Shaykh
Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛ and Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-Amīn b.
A╕mad b. Mu╕amdi, may Allah be pleased with them both.
But they confirmed us in our endeavor, praising Allah for
what had reached them, and supported us with their prayers
and with every kind of assistance. May Allah allow us to
benefit from them.

16. This Shaykh was entrusted by Shaykh Ibrāhīm’s father, al-╔ājj ‘AbdAllah Niasse, to give his son Ibrāhīm unlimited authorization (ijāza mu╙laqa)
in the Tijāniyya after al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah’s death. Shaykh Ibrāhīm includes
the text of the authorization later in the conclusion of the Kāshif.
17. Mu╕ammad b. A╕mad b. Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛ (d. 1945), the direct
descendant of Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛ (d. 1830) through A╕mad (d. 1907),
known as “Abba.”
Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within the Tijāniyya 93
Here is what I said years before the appearance of the Fay╓a:
Soon will the Fay╓a of the Saintly Seal come, so make ready
Detach yourself from others, to obtain the position.
And I said:
That is the isthmus (barzakh), that is the secret link (surur)
So my two loves are found in this flood (fay╓).
In a long praise poem for Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī, I wrote:
My companion, let us stop at the dwelling places
To hear the stories of the beautiful women.18
Let us conclude this chapter with the commendation of the
scholars (‘ulamā’) for this Fay╓a and its people. The following
verses were written by the erudite scholar of comprehensive
understanding, the most distinguished and excellent judge
(qā╓ī), Sīdī Mu╕ammad ‘Abd-Allah b. al-Mustafa al-‘Alawī:19
Is not the mosque of Ibrāhīm founded on piety (taqwa)?
This your land (O Shaykh), where there is neither misdeeds nor
vain talk
For the companions of Abū ‘Abbās (al-Tijānī) are gathered
around you
Obtaining from the Most High the greatest of ranks
Your finest city is the best of cities
For therein every stranger finds a place of refuge (ma’wan)
For here the Religion continues to spread in secret
For a thing has a share in that which its name is enfolded

18. Like wine, “pretty girls” or “beautiful women” is often meant as an
allegorical allusion in Sufi poetry. According to Anne-Marie Hilsdon,
“Women may be depicted in intimate relation with the Beloved, where the
Beloved comes to the poet as a woman does in an intimate relationship.” See
Hilsdon, “Rindu (Longing),” in Joseph and Najmabadi (eds.), Encyclopedia of
Women & Islamic Cultures (Brill, 2003), p. 241.
19. The poetry of this Mauritanian scholar is also cited by Sīdī ‘Alī Cisse in
his biography of Shaykh Ibrāhīm in the beginning of the Kāshif.
94 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
One is immediately taken upon entry (into the city)
By the fact the Religion has occupied the center of concentration
We came in troubled conditions
And we obtained there what lifted our distress
From among the successors (khulafā’) of the Shaykh (al-Tijānī),
there is one deputy (khalīfa)
Throughout all time, none can attain his rank
A cup of love makes the rounds among the drinkers
And with this (drink), there is no drunkenness and no soberingup
When they are vigilantly engaged in the remembrance of the
Guardian Lord (al-Muhaymin)
It is as if they quake, transported with joy and pleasure
They crave a draught from the sea of gnostic understandings
A sip that cures whatever worries they have acquired
Their spiritual states emerge as a testimony of what they have
claimed
And not every state is a testimony to the soundness of the claim
Accept the Shaykh of the (Sufi) people and travel his path
Do not follow any direction except that set by him
The inheritance (khilāfa) of Abū ‘Abbas (al-Tijānī) is
distributed by him
His command in every affair is followed
He dictates to his companions all sorts of knowledge
Filling them with jurisprudence and grammar
Who among the human race possesses such qualities
He has no like among people, this day or the next
So hold fast to this beautiful inheritance, which came at such
sacrifice
It is pronouncing to you its wishes and desires
Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within the Tijāniyya 95
How its ranks have been arranged! Free from every fault
No support or reinforcement is required
Its end result is nothing but benefit
And surely every affair is (judged) by the goodness of its ending
Blessing and peace on the master of creation
Mu╕ammad, the one sent, who has no comparison.
He also said:
Felicitous is your star of fortune, each time
And the zodiac sign is one of happiness and safety
O sun of the Hashimite Religion, congratulations are due to you
You are the returning point of all doctrines
I am speaking of Abū Is╕āq (Ibrāhīm Niasse), the shining
vanguard of his age
He who gives men to drink from cups brimming with gnosis
He is naught but the master of his time
The Tijānī Flood (Fay╓a) is at his hand
If compared with his peers, all fingers point to him alone
What a wonder! To him belongs an ocean that includes oceans
From the flux of the Lord of the Throne and all created beings
In him, the Divine Reality is an ocean at high tide
And the Sacred Law is a second ocean in him
As for jurisprudence (fiqh) and religious principles (u╗ūl); along
with their understandings
And their branches: each of them is an ocean (in him)
The same is true for the sciences of rhetoric
Linguistics and logic
The proof of my words is clear
And true is the speech with clear proofs
Ever and ceaselessly are all his moments
96 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Filled with remembrance and the Qur’ān
From all around, people descend on him
Like pigeons flocking on seeds
Every most pious individual, possessed of high morals and
intelligence
Who is keen on purifying his heart
Surely destiny will pull him to this Shaykh
For the pulling of destiny is like the pulling of the horse’s
reins
And nothing can prevent him, not the mention of his loved
ones
Not his family or his country
When he finds himself far from the locus of his longing
Burning in love will you find his heart
And when Allah is mentioned, you find him swaying
Like the swaying of the drunkard
Among all creation, the Shaykh’s position is raised ceaselessly
Until he has become higher than Orion (jawzā’), and the
mansions of the moon
May Allah protect you, our Abū Is╕āq
From the evil of the enemies
And from those harboring evil intent and evil words
From the evil of enviers and oppressors
And may He award you to follow Mu╕ammad
And may He give you the most honorable virtues and excellence
And give you the love of the masters of knowledge and their
sciences
And the love of the brotherhood of the Shaykh (Tijānī)
Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within the Tijāniyya 97
The following verses were composed by Mu╕ammad Abd
al-Ra╕mān b. al-Sālik b. Bāb al-‘Alawī,20 unique of his kind,
whose condition cannot be matched by those after him, the
singular intellect, the most fortunate star.
The secret in Medina (Baye) is the secret of the Shaykh (Tijānī)
So Allah has chosen it for us as a dwelling place
And He has chosen him (Shaykh Ibrāhīm) as its beautification
Indeed, it has obtained a grace that illumines the face of grace
itself
So follow the path of Medina and you will arrive
And hold fast to her pillars; but trouble ensues if you leave us
In pious visitation, you will obtain your needs
Or if you are afraid, you will find security in your visit
The habitual practice of Ibrāhīm is to lead the creation
So too is (mastery of) of knowledge his habit
My soul submitted to him at a young age
My passion was pulled to him by force
With his wealth and spiritual state will the poet purchase
Whatever beautiful acclamations (he must) from the eloquent
ones
Here I am building high buildings of love
But before him, still I find them but small hovels.
And he also said:
O Shaykh! Ka’ba21 of moral virtues
Arafat22 of aims and aspirations

20. This was another scholar of the ‘Alawī people of Mauritania, who claim
descent from ‘Alī b. Abī ╘ālib.
21. The Ka’ba is the name for the sacred house in Mecca around which the
pilgrims circumambulate and the direction to which Muslims pray.
22. Mount Arafat is where pilgrims spend the day in prayer during the ╔ājj.
98 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Mine of knowledge, well of the Secret
The goal on which the eyes of seekers and pious visitors are
fixated
Fruit of noble dignity and honor
Key to the door at every veil
You have not doubted your succession (khilāfa) to the Shaykh
(Tijānī)
Nor have you lent your ear to the doubter
You are the innermost heart among those giving spiritual
training
And rare among men is the heart of hearts
He commands the good, and forbids the wrong
He calls to the Truth, with gentle disposition
What a guide! Your disciple does not fear
Having to run this way and that
(For you are) both singular and plural, present and absent
Concealed and manifest; what is appropriate for every course
I ask Allah to grant you a long life
As a refuge for the distressed and afflicted
I ask Allah for the favor of our meeting
After this, and a beautiful journey’s end
Blessing from Allah
On the best of creation, and on his family and companions
And goodly pleasure on the reality of the Secret
Meaning the support of the saintly saviors (aghwāth) and poles
(aq╙āb).
Thus the shaykhs of Islam have spoken, the distinguished
men of our Spiritual Path. All of them have confirmed the
arrival of the Fay╓a on the hand of this delinquent servant, the
Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within the Tijāniyya 99
author of this blessed Tijānī compilation. The tongue of my
spiritual state says:
I was not worthy, but they considered me worthy
So because of that I came to be worthy.
Such are they among whom this Fay╓a has descended; for
their preoccupation has always been with Allah, His
Messenger and Shaykh al-Tijānī. The Shaykh has utterly
absorbed them, so that they do not do anything except for him
and by him. They are devoted to restoring his houses of
remembrance (zawāyā) with the remembrance of Allah, in the
watches of the night and at the beginning and end of the day.
This (devotion of theirs) is by the remembrance (of Allah) and
the invocation of blessing on Mu╕ammad, their mighty
exemplar, their means of achieving the Divine Presence. They
follow his Sunnah, his noble character traits, the tracks he has
left behind and his moral virtues. They have been insulted by
the heedless and foolish people, who accuse them of not being
part of the Tijāniyya. But it is the revilers who have failed to
give the Imam (Shaykh Tijānī) his proper due, so they have
nothing of the Tijāniyya except their having taken the litany
(wird). I find them laughably absurd, and say as the poet
Ma’arri23 said:
When al-Tā’iy24 has been reproached for being stingy
And Qusu25 has been called foolish and stupid;

23. A╕mad al-Tanūkhī al-Ma’arri (d. 1057) was a Syrian poet and ascetic of
great renown.
24. Hatim al-Tā’iy was a Christian Arab who lived before the time of the
Prophet (but whose son ‘Adi later became a companion of the Prophet) who
became famous for his generosity. His name later became synonymous with
paradigmatic generosity in Arabic literature.
25. Qusu was a preacher in Mecca during the time of Prophet Mu╕ammad’s
youth. The Prophet would later speak admirably of his intelligence, wisdom
100 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
When the dim star tells the sun, “you are small”
And the darkness tells the full moon, “your light is setting;”
Visit us, O death, for live has become objectionable
O self, take me seriously, for your lifespan has become a comedy
Notwithstanding what preceded us in terms of the signs
and indications being subtly interwoven, not one of these
respected shaykhs of the ╘arīqa claimed the Fay╓a for himself.
It is true that some such claims did occur in the early stages,
and this was a wise lesson from Allah. Zarrūq said, “A reality
has never become manifest without being greeted by a
pretension that resembles it, the insertion into it of something
that does not belong to it, and the emergence of denial.” All of
this demonstrates the merit of focusing undivided attention on
the Fay╓a, and clarifying its real meaning in refutation of its
opponents. “But Allah will annul what Satan has suggested;
then Allah will establish His revelations” (Qur’ān, 22:52).
He who inherits bears an affinity to what he inherits from.
Those most severely tried are the Prophets, then the saints,
then the next most eminent, and so on. A man is put to the test
only in proportion to his religious conviction, so the people of
this ╘arīqa have been sorely tried, first by being subjected to
criticism and abuse by their fellows; then by being made an
object of their reverential treatment; and finally with both at
once! Those so tested should not miss an opportunity to thank
Allah (alone) for commendation, and to patiently endure
blame. So if someone wishes to be among those of religious
conviction, he must make himself accustomed to affliction.
“Allah is the defender of those who believe” (Qur’ān, 22:38).
“And if someone puts all his trust in Allah, He will be

and eloquence. It is said that the “Amā ba’d” standard in the Friday sermon
(khutba) comes from Qusu.
Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within the Tijāniyya 101
sufficient for him” (65:3). The following passage is excerpted
from the Rimā╕, here quoting from Ba╕r al-Mawrūd:26
He (our Shaykh) took from us a solemn pledge – should we
seek to be included in the league (╕izb) of Allah – that we
accustom ourselves to endure trials and tribulations, and
abundant criticism from those we know and those we do not
know. Anyone whom Allah wishes to select, whether sinful or
righteous, will experience some such tests. Let it not surprise
you then, my dear brother, that people turn against those
seeking to be among those in the Presence of Allah. Entry into
this Presence is forbidden to anybody who attaches importance
to prestige in the eyes created beings. When Allah causes the
seeker to be assaulted by his fellow creatures with falsehood,
slander and rending scorn, he ceases to rely on his fellow
created beings, and comes to rely only on Allah. Like this, his
dependence on Allah becomes a necessity, and he seeks
prestige (maqām) from Him alone. In that place, Allah bestows
the station on him, then continues to elevate him in degrees of
proximity until he reaches the position that Allah has allotted
him. So long as the servant seeks prestige in the sight of the
creation, he is veiled from Allah the Most High. So long as such
repugnant characteristics multiply, the veils multiply as well;
until he may become veiled from Allah by seventy thousand
veils or even more. I once heard ‘Alī al-Khawwā╗,27 may Allah
have mercy on him, say: “The Lord of Truth will not select a
servant until the devils among men and jinn have joined forces
against him, assaulting him with falsehood and slander. Then if
he manages to estrange his ego-self (nafs) from the creation,
coming to rely on none of them, Allah the Exalted will choose
him.”

26. The Ba╕r al-Mawrūd by ‘Abd al-Wahhāb al-Sha’rānī (d. 1565).
27. ‘Alī al-Khawwā╗ (d. 1532), a shaykh of the Shadhiliyya Sufi order under
whom al-Sha’rani studied in Egypt.
102 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
And he (al-╔ājj ‘Umar) said:
Sīdī Abū al-╔asan al-Shādhilī, may Allah have mercy on him,
used to say, “When Allah the Exalted came to know of the
falsehood and slander people were saying about His Prophets
and bosom-friends ones, He condemned a (whole) people to
wretched misfortune. We take refuge with Allah the Exalted, for
people attributed to Him a wife and a son, and they said,
‘Allah’s hand is shackled’ (5:64), and other things. The saint who
is sadly at a loss for words before his accusers has consolation in
the example of his Almighty and Glorious Lord. They ascribed
to Him a wife and son, and linked Him to that which does not
befit His Majesty.”
Shaykh Tāj al-Dīn Ibn ‘A╙ā Allah, may Allah have mercy on
him, used to say, “It was Allah’s custom to test the Prophets and
His purified ones, subjecting them to vexation at the outset of
their careers. If they endured with patience, success would
finally be theirs.” He (al-Sha’rānī) discussed this at length in
Muqaddamāt al-╘abaqāt,
28 so understand the point well. And may
Allah take charge of your right guidance.
In Arā’is al-Bayān,
29 the author comments on the verse, “So
those who emigrated, and were driven from their homes, and
suffered for My cause” (3:195). He states that if the Sufi people
had not tasted the bitter abuse of their critics, they would not
have discovered the real meaning of taking refuge with Allah.
When the saints are disturbed by their adversaries to the point of
rage and constriction of the breast – that being the site of Allah’s
testing whether the saint can control a rage that would choke the
throats of the critics – the doors will be opened after that. Then
the way will be clear for freedom of speech, blissful serenity, and
the flow of gracious benefit.

28. Likely the introduction of Tabaqāt al-Kubra of al-Sha’rānī.
29. The Arā’is al-Bayān is a famous Sufi commentary on the Qur’ān written
by Ruzbihan al-Baqli (d. 1209) of Shiraz, Persia.
Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within the Tijāniyya 103
Junayd said, “May Allah reward our brethren on our behalf.
By treating us roughly, they have turned us back toward Allah
the Exalted. This is the customary practice of Allah in dealing
with the people who pursue the path of gnosis and unveiling.
Allah the Most High said, ‘And you will not find any means of
changing Allah’s custom’ (33:62).”
Al-╔ājj ‘Umar referred to al-Qawā’id al-Zarrūqiyya, then
mentioned the statements of Sīdī Zarrūq which already have
been discussed. Then he went on to say:
Studying this carefully you will understand that a man is put to
the test in proportion to his religious conviction, as was
mentioned earlier. Every Prophet and most truthful person had
an enemy. Adam had Iblīs. David had Goliath. Abraham had
Nimrod. Moses had Pharaoh. Jesus had Nebuchadnezzar, the
Antichrist and the Jews. Mu╕ammad had Abū Jahl and others.
Abū ‘Alī al-Khawwā╗ said: “The perfection of summoning to
Allah is dependent on peoples’ genuine belief in the propagator.
So the foremost in this regard was the Allah’s Messenger,
Mu╕ammad !, and the rest of the Prophets before him. Some
people believed them, so Allah guided them by His gracious
favor. Others disbelieved, so Allah afflicted them with His
justice. And the bosom-friends and saints have had enemies
from the age of the companions (of the Prophet) until this time
of ours; enemies who abuse them and say evil things about
them. Evidence for this is found in Allah’s saying, ‘And We
have appointed some of you as a trial for others’ (Qur’ān,
25:20).”
Since being put to the test is an honor, Allah has collected
for the elite of this Mu╕ammadan Community – because of the
loftiness of their rank – a combination of trials and tribulations
that were never so combined for previous communities.
104 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
‘Abd-Allah b. al-Zubayr30 was possessed of great humility
in prayer. They slandered him, saying, “He is an adulterous
hypocrite!” They poured hot water on his head while he was
in ritual prostration, but he did not notice what they were
doing. He suffered a painful headache for a long time
thereafter.
Ibn al-’Abbās31 was slandered by Nāfi’ b. al-Azraq,32 who
said of him, “He explains the Qur’ān without knowledge.”
Sa’d b. Abī Waqqās33 was insulted by some of the ignorant
folk of Kufa, who said, “He does not know how to perform the
ritual prayer properly.”
Abū Yazīd al-Bistāmī34 was banished from his homeland
seven times by al-╔usayn b. ‘Īsā. This was simply because alBastāmī taught his countrymen things unfamiliar to them,
such as the spiritual stations of the Prophets and saints. He did
not return to his hometown until after al-╔usayn’s death.
After his return, his people befriended him and held him in
high esteem.

30. ‘Abd-Allah b. al-Zubayr (624-692) was the son of Zubayr b. al-Awwam
and Asma bint Abū Bakr. He was the first Muslim child born in Medina and
was raised in the Prophet’s household since Aisha was his aunt. He fought
in many of the early military campaigns of the Muslims. Sometimes known
as the “Seventh Caliph,” he was no fan of the Umayyad Caliphate. He was
killed during a civil war between Muslims in the Hijaz, beheaded and
crucified.
31. ‘Abd-Allah b. al-‘Abbās (d. 688) was a companion and cousin of the
Prophet famous for his knowledge of the religion and especially for his
ability to explain the Qur’ān.
32. Nafi’ al-Azraq (d. 60) was the leader of one of the more powerful factions
of the Kharajites (those who early on departed from the Muslim community,
accusing ordinary Muslims of disbelief or idolatry), called the Azariqa.
33. Sa’d b. Abi Waqqas (d. 664) was the Prophet’s maternal uncle and one of
the first converts to Islam.
34. Abū Yazīd al-Bastāmī (d. 874), a prominent Sufi from Bastam, Persia.
Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within the Tijāniyya 105
Dhū al-Nūn al-Mi╗rī35 was likewise exiled from Egypt. He
was brought to Baghdad fettered and shackled, while the
people of Egypt followed him, accusing him of atheism.
Mu╕ammad b. Fa╓l al-Balkhī36 was expelled from Balkh
because of his adherence to the school of ╔adīth. As he left, he
told the people, “Allah has removed His knowledge from your
hearts.” No Sufi ever emerged in Balkh again after that, even
though the region was one of greatest Sufi lands.
Al-Junayd was similarly accused of unbelief. He used to
teach the science of Divine Oneness in public, but after such
accusations, he began teaching in the basement of his home.
Shaykh Ibn Abī Jamra was censured by a special meeting
of protest on account of his saying, “I have met with the
Prophet !.” So he stayed in house until he died, leaving only
to attend the congregational prayer. Nonetheless, he was
accused of unbelief, of declaring the permissibility of alcohol
and sodomy. He was accused of dressing up at night in the
religious attire of non-Muslims. He was taken bound and
shackled from Syria to Egypt.
Abū Madyan37 was accused of atheism, and he was
expelled from Bougie to Tlemcen, where he died and was
buried.

35. Dhū al-Nūn al-Mi╗rī (d. 859) was an early Sufi of Egypt. He was arrested
in 829 on charges of heresy and sent to prison in Baghdad. He later returned
to Cairo, where he is buried.
36. Mu╕ammad b. Fa╓l al-Balkhī (d. 931), of the Balkh province of Khorasan
(Afghanistan) was the disciple of A╕mad Khidruya (d. 854). After his
expulsion, he traveled to Samarkand and served the people as a Shafi’i jurist
and Sufi guide.
37. Abū Madyan Shu’ayb (d. 1198) was born in Andalusia and died in
Tlemcen (Algeria). He was the teacher of Abd al-Salam b. Mashish and thus
an important figure in the development of the Shadhiliyya order. He had
begun teaching in Bougie (Algeria) after returning from pilgrimage,
influencing the likes of Ibn al-Arabi, Abd al-Salam Ibn Mashish and Abū
106 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
╔akīm al-Tirmidhī38 was banished on account of his books,
‘Ilal al-Sharī’a and Kahtm al-Awliyā’. It was said, “He has
declared the saints superior to the Prophets,” and he was
insulted with crude language. Both books were thrown into
the ocean, but a fish swallowed them and spat them out
elsewhere.
Sa’d b. ‘Abd-Allah was accused of shameful acts. He was
exiled from Egypt, and he died in a foreign land.
Abū Sa’īd al-Kharrāz39 was accused of terrible sins and
unbelief because of statements found in his books.
Yūsuf b. al-╔usayn40 was accused of terrible sins, until the
point of his death. But he remained firm in his dignity, paying
no attention.
Abū al-╔asan al-Būsanjī41 was exiled to Nishabur, where
he remained until he died.
Sa╕nūn al-Mu╕ibb 42 was accused of terrible sins. A
prostitute was bribed and made to say that he and his friends
were in the habit of visiting her.
Al-Shiblī43 was accused on unbelief on several occasions.
Even those who used to love him accused him of lunacy, and
he was committed to an insane asylum to keep people away

Hassan al-Shadhili. For more on his life and thinking, see Vincent Cornell,
The Way of Abū Madyan: Doctrinal and Poetic Works of Abū Madyan Shu’ayb ibn
al-Husayn al-Ansari (Islamic Texts Society, 1996).
38. Hakīm al-Tirmidhī (d. 905-910) lived in Tirmidh, near Balkh in modernday Afghanistan. He is the first known Sufi or expound on the concept of the
Seal of Saints.
39. Abū Sa’īd al-Kharrāz (d. 899) was from Baghdad. He was famous for
expounding ideas such as fana’ (annihilation) and baqa’ (remaining).
40. Likely Yūsuf b. al-╔usayn al-Rāzī (d. 916), an early Sufi.
41. Likely Abū al-Hasan al-Haysam al-Busanji (d. 1009), who wrote Qisas alQur’ān.
42 . Sa╕nūn al-Mu╕ibb was a famous majdhūb (enraptured) Sufi
contemporary to Junayd (9th century) in Iraq.
43. Abū Bakr al-Shiblī (d. 946), a famous Sufi and Maliki jurist of Baghdad.
Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within the Tijāniyya 107
from him. One of the shaykhs of Baghdad said, “If Allah did
not yet have a Hellfire, He would have created it then for
those who abused al-Shiblī, calling him an unbeliever!” He
also said, “If al-Shiblī does not enter the Garden of Paradise,
who will?”
Imam Abū Bakr al-Qābisī was banished from Morocco and
brought to Egypt in chains. While reciting the Qur’ān with
contemplation and deep humility, he was seized and flayed
alive. He was said to have subjected the people to temptations,
so that when the matter was presented to the Sultan, he said,
“Kill him and flay his corpse!”
Al-Nasafī was likewise flayed in Aleppo. He would look at
the person flaying him and smile. He composed five hundred
verses of poetry affirming the Oneness of Allah while he was
being flayed. He was condemned when his enemies cunningly
entrapped him. They sent the Shaykh a pair of shoes as a
present, into the soles of which had been inserted a piece of
paper on which was written the Qur’ānic chapter Ikhlā╗. The
Shaykh put the shoes on without realizing what he was doing.
His enemies then told the governor of Aleppo, “Al-Nasafī has
written the Chapter Ikhla╗ and put it in his shoe to be stepped
on.” So the governor sent an agent who found the piece of
paper. The Shaykh surrendered to the Will of Allah and did
not defend himself, for he knew he would inevitably be put to
death.
Abū al-Qāsim al-Bahrabādhī was banished from Basra, as
well as Abū ‘Abd-Allah, the companion of Abū Hafs alHaddad.
Abū al-╔asan al-Ba╗rī was accused of unbelief.
Foul things were said of Ibn Sham’un till the point of his
death, and no funeral prayer was given him.
108 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Imam Abū al-Qāsim b. Jamīl was accused of terrible sins to
the point of death. But he was never distracted from his
preoccupation with knowledge, the Prophetic tradition, the
night vigil and his abstinence from the world until he wore the
funeral shroud.
According to Abū Bakr al-Sim╙ānī, Abū Dīnār used to
disparage al-Junayd, Ruwaym, Sa╕nūn, Ibn ‘A╙ā-Allah and the
shaykhs of Iraq. Whenever someone mentioned them in his
presence, he became enraged and fell into a fit.
Abū al-╔asan al-Shādhilī was exiled from Morocco to
Egypt, and accused of atheism, apostasy and declaring lawful
the forbidden things.
Imam Abū al-Qāsim b. Qusayy, Ibn Hayyān, al-Jawnī and
al-Marjānī were all killed.
Ibn al-’Arabī al-╔ātimī and Ibn al-Fārid have not ceased to
be censured till the present time.
‘Izz al-Dīn44 was subjected to formal interrogation on
account of a statement found in his book, al-Aqā’id.
Taqī al-Dīn b. al-Layth al-A’azz was envied and falsely
accused of maligning the Sultan. He was threatened with
execution, but Allah came to his rescue.
Al-Suyū╙ī said:
Among the blessings bestowed on me by Allah is that He
provided me with an enemy who abused me and defames my
honor, so that I may have something in common with the
Prophets and the saints. Know that there has never been a great
man in any time who did not have an enemy among those of
base character; thus the nobles (ashrāf) are forever tested by the
fringe groups (a╙rāf).

44. Likely ‘Izz al-Dīn al-Sulami (d. 1261), a famous Shafi’i jurist and Shadhili
Sufi who spent most of his life in Syria and wrote Aqa’id Ahl al-Islam.
Mention of the Flood (Fay╓a) within the Tijāniyya 109
Sīdī Abū al-╔asan (al-Shādhilī) used to say:
Since Allah, Almighty and Glorious is He, knew from His preeternal knowledge what would be said about this righteous
company (tā’ifa), He began with Himself. Thus He condemned a
people to wretched misfortune because they attributed to Him a
wife and a son and incapacity, declaring His Hands tied. If a
saint or truthful person should feel depressed because of his
accusers smearing him with allegations of unbelief, atheism,
sorcery, insanity or other defamations, subtle voices from the
Lord of Truth call out to him, saying, “What is said about you
would be your apt description, if not for My gracious favor to
you! Have you not seen how your brethren among the children
of Adam have also dishonored Me, attributing to Me improper
things?” Then, if he is still depressed, the voices call to him
again, “In regards to this defamation, you have an example in
Me, for things are said about Me which do not befit My Majesty.
And things have been said about Mu╕ammad and his brethren
among the Prophets, peace and blessings on them, which do not
befit their dignity. They were accused of sorcery and insanity,
and wanting nothing other than leadership.”
Shaykh al-Tijānī, the Seal of Saints !, was also tried and
tested. Ibn Māyāba45 composed a book to discredit him and his
companions, loaded with vilification, slander, curses and
accusations of unbelief and misguidance. Nothing but envy
causes the stubborn petrification of the jurists, inciting them to

45. The book of Mu╕ammad Khidr b. Mayaba, Mushtaha al-Kharif al-Jani fir
add zalaqat al-Tijānī al-Jani, was first published in 1925. The most detailed
refutation of this work was by Mu╕ammad Khalifa b. Abd-Allah Niasse (the
older brother of Shaykh Ibrāhīm Niasse), called al-Juyush al-Tulla’ bi
Murhafat al-Qutta’ ila Ibn Mayaba akhi al-Tanattu’, published in 1930. For more
on this subject see Ousmane Kane, “Mu╕ammad Niasse (1881-1956) et sa
réplique contre le pamphlet anti-tijânî de Ibn Mayaba,” in Triaud and
Robinson (eds.), La Tijâniyya: un confrérie musulmane à la conquête de l’Afrique
(Paris: Karthala, 2001).
110 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
censure Allah’s bosom friends (a╗fiyā’). According to the
erudite scholar Zarrūq, in Ta’sīs al-Qawā’id:
The meaning of envy is connected to duplicity. The goal of the
envier is to subject his target of envy to character assassination.
Whenever souls are endowed with excellent virtues, enviers
become preoccupied with their characters and the means of
destroying them. So enviers pursue their ends in various ways. If
a common person is envied, in the market place for example, he
is not accused of anything except cheating, swindling and the
like. If a soldier is envied, he is accused of disrespect, neglect of
his duties and like things. When a jurist or one who recites the
Qur’ān is envied, he is accused of unbelief, mistakes and
whatever else will ruin his reputation and cause people to doubt
his character. When the Sufis (fuqurā’) are envied, they are
accused of deceit and cunning, of being masters of delusion, and
so on. Other examples abound, but would take too long to
mention.
This ends the chapter. Allah the Glorious is the enabling
guide to the straight path, to Him is the return and
destination.
111
CHAPTER 2
Spiritual Experiences (adhwāq) and
their Foundation in the Qur’ān and
Sunnah
With Allah the Most High is all success, and He is the
Guide by His Grace to the balanced path.
n the beginning of his ╘abaqāt,1 Sha’rānī said:
The purpose of this introduction is to explain that the way of the
(Sufi) people is based on the Qur’ān and the Sunnah. It is
founded on exemplifying the characteristics of the Prophets and
the purified ones. This way cannot be considered blameworthy
for any reason except if it is at variance with the unambiguous
ruling of the Qur’ān, the Sunnah and the consensus of the
Muslim scholars. And since it does not depart from these
foundations, the final word on the subject is simply that it is an
understanding which a Muslim adult has been given. Let him
put it into practice who wishes, and let him ignore it who

1. Al-Shar’ānī’s al-╘abaqāt al-Kubra al-Musamma bi Lawāqi╕ al-Anwār fī Tabaqāt
al-Akhyār is a collection of 430 biographies of righteous Sufis, from the time
of the Prophet’s companions to the Shaykh’s own time.
I
112 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
wishes. This leaves no motive for criticizing the Sufi people,
except that the critic thinks badly of them and wants to cast
doubt on their sincerity. Certainly this is not permitted
according to the Sacred Law.
Dear brother, may Allah have mercy on you! Know that the
science of Sufism is a knowledge kindled in the hearts of the
saints, until the practical application of the Qur’ān and the
Sunnah completely illuminated their hearts. For anyone who
puts the religion into practice like this has such sciences kindled
in him, along with moral virtues, secrets and Divine realities
which tongues are incapable of enunciating. This is similar to the
way in which the scholars have had knowledge kindled in their
hearts from studying the legal rules, and they likewise have put
into practice what they have learned. Consider how the sciences
of rhetoric and eloquence are the cream of the knowledge of
grammar. Similarly, Sufism, provided the servant is free from
false pretexts and self-indulgence, is simply the sweet cream of
practicing the rulings of the Sacred Law. In the same way that
rhetoric and eloquence may be considered either independent
sciences or part of the science of grammar, so too Sufism can
either be considered its own science or the essence of the Sacred
Law.
Sufism’s stemming from the essence of the Sacred Law
cannot be tasted, however, except by the one who delves into the
depths of the Sacred Law. When the servant enters the Sufi path,
plunging into its ocean, Allah gives him the capacity of
discovery. This pertains to both the external rulings as well as
the obligations of the spiritual path; its recommended
procedures, its proper conduct and manners, and what is
forbidden or reprehensible. He is able to distinguish what is
appropriate and what is not, similar to the scholars of
independent legal reasoning (mujtahidūn). But it is not proper for
a jurist endowed with the authority of independent legal
reasoning to declare something obligatory unless its obligation is
Spiritual Experiences (adhwāq) 113
explicitly stated in the Sacred Law. It is equally improper for a
saint of Allah to say that a rule within the spiritual path is
obligatory, unless its obligation is made explicit in the Sacred
Law. This has been said in no uncertain terms by al-Yāfi’ī2 and
others, who explain that all saints are equal before the Law;
Allah has simply chosen them for His religion. Those who pay
attention realize that the sciences of the Allah’s people contain
nothing that departs from the Sacred Law. How could it be
otherwise, when these sciences have linked them to Allah in
every moment?
He who doubts that science of Sufism stems from the
essence of the Sacred Law is unfamiliar with people of the
spiritual path and has not thoroughly mastered the knowledge
of the Sacred Law. This is why al-Junayd, may Allah have mercy
on him, said, “This knowledge of ours is built of the Qur’ān and
the Sunnah,” in reply to those of his time or any other who
imagine it has departed from them. The Sufi people
unanimously concur that it not permitted to put up obstacles
(ta╗addur) in the path of Allah the Almighty unless one has
plunged into the depths of the Sacred Law. He should know the
Law’s explicit and implicit rulings, which are of general
applicability and which are particular, which supersede others
and which are superseded. He must also have thorough
knowledge of the Arabic language, its figurative and
metaphorical expressions, and so forth.
Every Sufi is an expert on jurisprudence, but not every jurist
is a Sufi. Generally speaking, no one dares to criticize the
spiritual states of the Sufis unless he is wholly ignorant of their
condition. Al-Qushayri used to say: “No era of Islamic history
has had a shaykh of this Sufi group to whom the leading
scholars of the time did not pay homage, show humility towards
and seek blessing from. If the people of the spiritual path had

2. Likely ‘Abd-Allah al-Yāfi’ī (d. 1367), a famous Shāfi’ī jurist and Sufi writer
known for his defense of Ibn al-‘Arabi against his detractors.
114 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
not been endowed with special excellence and distinction, the
opposite would have been the case.”
In his commentary on al-Shifā’, Sīdī ‘Alī al-Qārī3 explained
the saying of the Prophet !, “Whoever innovates something in
our decree…;”4 or the alternative narration in ╖a╕ī╕ Muslim,
“Whoever behaves in a way not in accordance with our
decree;” or in another narration, “Whoever introduces
something into our religion,” or in another, “in this decree of
ours …”
In other words, “(innovation in) this clear and perfect decree,
which needs no innovated addition.” The word “addition” here
means anything for which the Qur’ān and the Sunnah provide
no support, whether obvious or concealed, explicit or implicit. In
one narration, the wording of the ╔adīth is: “(If someone
introduces) what is not found in it, it (huwa) is rejected.”5
Depending on whether the pronoun huwa here denotes the
innovation or the innovator, either it or he is the object of
rejection. This Prophetic tradition (in its various versions) is the
basic ruling on adherence to the Qur’ān and the Sunnah and the
rejection of heresies and innovation.
‘Alī, may Allah ennoble his countenance, said in an
authentic report: “If I had wished, I could have loaded eighty
camels with books explaining the sciences concerning the dot
beneath the Arabic letter bā’.”6 Imam al-Sha’rāni mentions this

3. Mullah ‘Alī al-Qārī (d. 1605) was born in Herat, Afghanistan, and
migrated to Mecca, where he became a renowned scholar of his time. He
composed numerous commentaries on classical Islamic texts, such as the
Muwatta of Imam Mālik and al-Shifā’ of Qadi Iyad b. Musa.
4. ╔adīth found in ╖a╕ī╕ Bukhārī.
5. The ╔adīth’s version as reported by ‘Ā’isha is: “Whoever does something
outside of our decree, it (or he) is rejected.”
6. The letter bā’, which is marked by a subscript dot, is the first letter of the
phrase, bismillah al-rahman al-rahim, which begins the Qur’ān and nearly
every subsequent chapter. It is thus the first letter of the Qur’ān.
Spiritual Experiences (adhwāq) 115
statement in his book al-Mizān.7 In another of his books, alJawhar al-Ma╗ūn fī ‘Ulūm Kitāb Allah al-Maknūn, he said he had
enumerated approximately thirty thousand sciences. AlShar’ānī relates that Shaykh Shihāb al-Dīn b. ‘Abd al-╔aqq
studied the book for a month, but was incapable of
comprehending the relevance of a single science, so he said,
“For what reason have you written this book at this time?”
Shar’ānī said, “I have written it to aid the people of Allah,
because many people accuse them of being ignorant of the
Qur’ān and the Sunnah.” Shihāb al-Dīn said, “I describe
myself as a scholar of Egypt, Syria, the Hijāz, Asia Minor and
Persia, but I have been incapable of understanding the
relevance to the Qur’ān of even one science you mention, and I
understand nothing of its contents. Nevertheless, I cannot
reject your book in every respect, because the direction of its
discourse is not futile or vulgar.”
Consider the words of Allah, “And We have revealed the
Book to you as an exposition of all things” (Qur’ān, 16:89).
And He said, “We have neglected nothing in the Book” (6:38).
And He said, “And He created that which you do not know”
(16:8). Ponder the response of our master ‘Alī, may Allah
ennoble his countenance, when Abū Juhayfa asked him, “Do
you people have a book which Allah’s Messenger, may Allah
bless him and grant him peace, has dedicated exclusively to
you?” He replied, “No, not apart from the Book of Allah the
Exalted.”8 (And evidence of its dedication is provided by the

7. The Mīzān al-Kubra is al-Sha’rānī’s work on comparative jurisprudence
between the four schools of Sunni Islamic Law.
8. The full ╔adīth is found in the ╖a╕ī╕ of al-Bukhārī. ‘Alī’s full response
was, “By Him Who made the grain split and created the soul, we have
nothing except what is in the Qur’ān and the gift of understanding Allah’s
Book with which He may endow a man …”
116 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Qur’ānic verse) “Glory be to Him who carried His servant by
night” (17:1).9 Abū Hurayra ! used to say: “I received two
vessels from Allah’s Messenger, peace and blessings on him.
One I have poured out for all of you. As for the other, if I
poured it out, this throat of mine would have been cut.”10 A
similar version is found in the appendix of Shaykh Sīdī
Mukhtār (Kuntī):11 “Abū Hurayra used to say, ‘I have taken
from Allah’s Messenger two cases of knowledge. One of them
I have shared around. As for the other, by Allah, if I
mentioned one word of it, you would have cut my throat
before I finished speaking.’” In like manner, ‘Alī b. Abī ╘ālib
used to say in poetic verse:
O Lord, were I to reveal a certain jewel of knowledge
I would be told, “You are among those who worship idols”
And Muslim men would find it lawful to shed my blood
Believing the vile sin they were committing to be a good deed.
The reason for all of this is that the burden of the Divine
Realities can only be borne by one whom Allah has prepared.
Allah will expand the breast of such a one to cope with what is
involved. Indeed, no one is capable of bearing the Realities
except a noble Prophet or a wise saint. Ja’far al-╖ādiq said,
“When the lover comes to the utmost point of proximity to the
Beloved, he experiences the utmost sense of awe (hayba). So
the Real treats him with the greatest kindness, since He says,
‘And He inspired His servant with what He inspired’ (53:10).”
In other words, what happens happens, and the Beloved says
to His beloved what He says; and the secret is concealed, so

9. This is in reference to the Prophet’s night journey and ascension (Isra wa
Mi’raj).
10. Narration found in the ╖a╕ī╕ of al-Bukhārī.
11. This is the appendix of Kuntī’s al-Kawkab al-Waqqād fī fa╓l dhikr almashā’ikh wa ╕aqā’iq.
Spiritual Experiences (adhwāq) 117
momentous is the matter. No one is aware of it because no one
knows what was inspired except the one who was inspired.
The one inspired obscures his secret due to its weighty
importance, and becomes devout in his worship on account of
his trust in it.
The Prophet ! did make this knowledge available to the
elite of his community, however. They are his true inheritors.
The substance of this knowledge imparted directly from the
Divine Presence (al-ilm al-ludunī) cannot be comprehended or
borne except by those to whom it belongs among the saintly
poles (aq╙āb) of this noble Mu╕ammadan community. Fakhr alDīn al-Rāzī12 mentions that his father once told him that he
heard Abū al-Qāsim Sulaymān al-An╗ārī say:
When Mu╕ammad ! attained to the exalted rank of the
heavenly ascension, Allah the Exalted informed him, ‘O
Mu╕ammad, the honor on you has been perfected.’ To which
Mu╕ammad replied, ‘O Lord, by my devotion to You in loving
servanthood (‘ubūdiya).’13 Allah the Exalted said, ‘Glory to Him
who carried His servant by night’ (Qur’ān, 17:1). Thus Allah
named him “servant” (’abd) with this ascension so he would
come to embody (tahaqqaqa) Allah’s Greatest Name. In truth, this
name (“servant”) is not fitting for anybody but he, may Allah’s
peace and blessing be upon him. The saintly poles (aq╙āb) from
his community after him also can be called “servant”, but only as

12. Mu╕ammad b. ‘Umar Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī (d. 1210, Herat, Persia) was a
great theologian, philosopher and scientist. His multi-volume Tafsīr al-Kabīr,
also known as Mafāti╕ al-Ghayb, is a comprehensive exegesis of the Qur’ān.
13. A slightly different translation of this narration of al-An╗ārī, is related by
Hisham Kabbani: “It is related that when the Prophet reached the highest
levels and distinguished stations, Allah revealed to him, ‘With what shall I
honor you?’ The Prophet said, ‘By relating me to You through servanthood
(‘ubudiyya).’” See Kabbani, “The Importance and Meaning of Prayer in
Islam,” in Cornell and Safi (eds.), Voices of Islam, Volume II, Voices of the Spirit
(Greenwood Publishing, 2007), p. 45.
118 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
a consequence of the Prophet, they do not bear this reality in
themselves. Others besides the poles realize this name (servant)
but only metaphorically, not actually.
In one narration, the Prophet said: “When I was alone with
my Lord, He revealed to me three types of knowledge. One type
of knowledge – He took an oath from me to hide it, for no one
would be able to bear it except myself. Another type of
knowledge – He commanded me to share it with the elite
(khawā╗) of my community, for they are the saintly substitutes
(abdāl) for the Prophets. The last type of knowledge – He took an
oath from me to inform everybody, common folk and the elite.
He taught me the Qur’ān, and I anticipated Gabriel in (the
revelation of) a verse from Him, so my Lord reproved me, and
said, “Do not be quick to recite the Qur’ān before its revelation
to you is completed; but rather say: ‘My Lord, increase me in
knowledge’” (Qur’ān, 20:114).
In another narration, the Prophet said: “When I approached
my Lord until I was as He said, ‘Till he was (the proximity) of
two bow-lengths or nearer’ (53:9), my Lord asked me, but I was
unable to respond. So He put His Hand between my shoulder
blades, without qualification (takyīf) or delimitation (ta╕dīd), until
I discovered the chill (bard) of the Divine Presence upon my
heart. Then I inherited the knowledge of everything that came
before and everything that was to follow. He taught me all the
sciences, what had been scattered and dispersed. One
knowledge – He took an oath from me to hide, knowing that
none could bear it other than myself. Another knowledge – He
gave me the option (of sharing it or not). And He taught me the
Qur’ān, and Gabriel, peace be upon him, reminded me in this.
Another knowledge – He commanded me to give it to both the
common people and elite of my community.” This has been
related on the authority of Abū Hurayra.14

14. These narrations related by Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī are not found in the
canonical ╔adīth collections. Further explanation of the three types of
Spiritual Experiences (adhwāq) 119
At this point, allow me to recollect certain verses of the
Qur’ān of relevance to the subject of spiritual experience.
Allah the Exalted said:
So whichever way you turn, there is the Face of Allah (2:115).
And say, “Truth has come and falsehood vanished. Falsehood is
ever bound to vanish” (17:81).
But We hurl the truth against the falsehood, and it shatters its
skull, and behold! It vanishes (21:18).
That is because when Allah only was invoked, you disbelieved.
But if partners were ascribed to Him, you believed (40:12).
He is the First, the Last, the Manifest, the Hidden; and He is
Aware of all things (57:3).
We shall show them Our signs on the horizons and within
themselves, until it becomes clear to them that this (Qur’ān) is
the truth (41:53).
The Compassionate has firmly established Himself on the
Heavenly Throne (20:5).
Say: “The Compassionate has no son. And I am the first of His
worshipers” (43:81).
Whoever obeys the Messenger has obeyed Allah (4:80).

knowledge obtained by the Prophet during the Mi’rāj was provided by
Shaykh Tijānī Cisse (Interview, Medina-Baye, Senegal, January 9, 2009):
“The general knowledge to share with everybody is the Sacred Law
(Sharī’a), the Qur’ān and the Sunnah. The second type of knowledge for the
elite consists of the knowledge of the essential reality (ilm al-haqīqa), that
nothing exists except Allah. The Prophet was teaching this knowledge to the
elite of his companions, such as Abū Bakr and ‘Umar. The third type of
knowledge, only shared between Allah and himself, is referred to as ‘the
knowledge of the secret of predestination’ (ilm sirr al-qadr). It concerns the
secret purpose for the creation of every single thing – even the rug you are
sitting on now – from the beginning of time till the end. No one can bear this
knowledge except the Prophet, so Allah took an oath from him not to share
it with anybody.”
120 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Those who swear allegiance to you (O Mu╕ammad), swear
allegiance to Allah. The Hand of Allah is over their hands
(48:10).
And it was not you (O Mu╕ammad) who threw when you threw
(pebbles cutting down the enemy); but it was Allah who threw
(8:17).
Say: “If you love Allah, follow me; Allah will love you” (3:31).
For those who believe and do righteous deeds, and believe in
what is sent down to Mu╕ammad – and it is the Truth from their
Lord – He will cover over their evil deeds and right their
condition (47:2).
And Allah suffices as witness … Mu╕ammad is the Messenger of
Allah (48:27-28).
Whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger, they are in the
company of those whom Allah has blessed: the Prophets, the
most truthful ones, the martyrs and the righteous. And the best
of company are they (4:69)!
He who came with the truth, and he who confirmed it; they
indeed are the God-fearing (39:33).
How many a sign there is in the heavens and the earth which
they pass by with face averted (12:105)!
As well as in your own selves (are signs). What, do you not see
(51:21)?
The Messenger of Allah ! reported that his Lord told him:
“I was a treasure. I was unknown and I wished to known, so I
created the creations and made Myself known to them. So
through Me they came to know Me.”15 The Prophet said,

15. ╔adīth Qudsī (holy or sacred Prophetic tradition) cited by al-‘Ajlūni in
Kashf al-Khafā’. According to al-‘Ajlūni, al-Qārī said: “Its meaning is correct
according to Allah’s saying, ‘I did not create the Jinn and humankind except
to worship Me’ (Qur’ān, 51:56). As Ibn ‘Abbās explained, ‘to worship Me,’
Spiritual Experiences (adhwāq) 121
“Allah existed when there was nothing with Him.” ‘Alī said,
“And He is now in the state He was then.” He also said, “How
true is the saying of the poet Labīd, ‘Everything apart from
Allah is surely unreal.’”16 The Prophet ! also reported that his
Lord told him, “Neither My earth nor my heaven can contain
Me, but the heart of My believing servant contains Me.”17
These verses from the Qur’ān and sayings of the Prophet
contain matters that cannot be discussed, and secrets that
cannot be disclosed.
A small indication of this Divine Beauty is enough for you
Then leave it guarded behind the veil of Divine Majesty.
To put it another way:
As for the one seeking information of Layla’s secret
I have sent him away in ignorance of her, with no certain
knowledge
They say, “Inform us, for you are her custodian!”
But if I were to inform them, I would not have been the custodian.
It could also be said:
If you have not seen the newborn crescent moon
Submit to those whose eyes have seen it.
This is the end of what we wanted to gather in this
chapter. With Allah is the success on the straight path, and to
Him, the Glorified, is the return and final destination.

implies, ‘to know Me.’” This ╔adīth often quoted by the Sufis is sometimes
related with the following wording: “I was a hidden treasure and I wished
to be known, so I created the creations, and through Me they came to know
Me.”
16. The poet Labīd b. Rabiah b. Ja’far al-Amiri was well admired by the
Prophet. This ╔adīth is on the authority of Abū Hurayra and reported in
╖a╕ī╕ al-Bukhārī.
17. ╔adīth Qudsī cited by Abū Hamid al-Ghazali in I╕yā’ ‘Ulūm al-Dīn and
by al-‘Ajlūni in Kashf al-Khafā’.
122
CHAPTER 3
The Sphere of Spiritual Training in
the Tariqa Tijāniyya
With Allah is the success for what I say, and He is the
Guide by His grace to the balanced path.
he sphere of spiritual training (tarbiya) revolves around
two poles. The first is the establishment of the five
ritual prayers in accordance with their proper
conditions. The second is the invocation of blessing on the
Prophet throughout the night and at the beginning and end of
the day, with the intention of obeying Allah’s command to do
so; and this with magnification, reverence and love (for the
Prophet). This follows the strict observance of the obligatory
daily litany (wird), which confirms the authenticity of being a
Tijānī aspirant.
In the Bughyat (al-Mustafīd), one of the main books of the
Tijānī path, the illustrious spiritual master and venerable
guide, the father of endowments, al-Sayyid ‘Arabi b. Sā’i╕,
said on the subject of spiritual training:
T
The Sphere of Spiritual Training in the Tariqa Tijāniyya 123
The sphere of spiritual training and purification in this noble
Mu╕ammad path of ours is centered on five practices. The first is
the obligatory daily litany, without which entry into this path is
invalid whatever a person’s scholarly credentials. The second
practice, linked to the first, is the attendance of the
congregational remembrance; both the daily office (wa╛īfa) and
the weekly remembrance of “there is no god but Allah” (haylala)
following the afternoon prayer on Friday.1
The next essential practice is the attendance of the five daily
ritual prayers. Certainly all the practices mentioned here require
careful observance of the stipulated conditions and proper
modes of conduct in order to attain excellence and perfection.
But of all the practices, the most imperative is the careful
observance of the five daily prayers with their traditional
elements as prescribed by the Sacred Law. You must comply
with these stipulations as much as possible, perfectly fulfilling
the basic elements of the prayer as established by customary
practice.
The next step in spiritual training is the aspirant’s dedication
to the invocation of blessing on the Prophet ! (╗alāt ‘ala al-nabiyy)
to the maximum extent possible, in all available moments. The
best method thereof is with the Invocation of Opening what was
Locked (╗alāt al-fāti╕ lima ughliq), which is one of the most exalted
and precious treasures.
Lastly, the aspirant undergoing spiritual training must
persist in loving affection for the Prophet ! and gratitude to
Allah the Most High. He should rely only on Divine grace, the
sole means of realizing sainthood. In this way, sainthood is
realized without the necessity of secluded retreat (khalwa),
excessive strenuous exertion, or any of the other methods of
training adopted after the earliest centuries of Islam.

1. Detailed descriptions of the obligatory Tijānī remembrances can be found
in Appendix I of this book.
124 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
The type of spiritual path described here is what our master
(Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī) ! was commanded to follow by the
master of existence, the fountain of spiritual assistance and
generosity !.
According to the Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī, the Prophet ! informed
our master and Shaykh (al-Tijānī) ! that he ! was the sole
intermediary between him and Allah the Exalted. He also told
him that he ! was definitely his spiritual sustainer, and the
sole guardian in charge of his spiritual training in place of all
the masters of the Sufi path. He informed him that not one of
the spiritual masters had any favor to grant him, for
everything he would receive from Allah would come by the
assistance and mediation of the Prophet !. Then he advised
him, “Adhere to this spiritual path (╙arīqa) without seclusion
(khalwa) or separation from people, until you arrive to spiritual
station (maqām) promised you, while maintaining your
(current) condition, without deprivation, constriction or a
great deal of strenuous exertion.”
The gnostic sage al-Busayrī, may Allah have mercy on him
and be well pleased with him, indicated such a condition in
verse:
Excellence is not achieved by means
Of excessive abstinence nor asceticism
If it is said, “That is the medicine,” say
“The kohl of the healthy (for beautification) is not like the kohl
used for eye-maladies.”
The one granted the right of disposal walks where he wills
Others walk like stones, shackled.
Sīdī al-‘Arabi b. Sā’i╕ said in al-Jawāb al-Shāfī:
Whomever good fortune drives into entering this A╕madī
Spiritual Path – whomever Divine Providence attracts to this
The Sphere of Spiritual Training in the Tariqa Tijāniyya 125
chain of Mu╕ammadan transmission, whomever Allah’s
gracious favor has prepared to taste this great distinction,
whomever His generosity has admitted to this marvelous store
of treasure – his only remaining option is to bind himself to this
greatest teacher (Shaykh Tijānī). He must finish himself at his
door and cling to his threshold; and this by the path of love,
submission and acceptance of his will and judgment. He must
apply himself with diligence and perseverance to this noble
Mu╕ammadan litany, observing its conditions and keeping
within its precise limits. Then Allah the Exalted may grant him
success. And this can be achieved while he remains in his normal
condition, without secluded retreat, strenuous exertion or
conventional spiritual exercises of other kinds. Success will
either come upon him suddenly or take him by surprise. Allah
the Exalted will favor him by removing the veil from his heart,
and he will become united with the spirituality of the Shaykh !
or the spirituality of the Prophet !. Like this, his spiritual
training comes by the flooding abundance (istifā╓a) from one of
them, or from both of them together. “That is the grace of Allah,
which He gives to whom He wills; and Allah is the owner of
infinite grace” (Qur’ān, 57:21). This is the meaning of what is
found in the Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī in regards to visualizing the
presence of the Shaykh ! or the Prophet ! while performing the
litanies for him who is able. The Mīzāb al-Ra╕mat al-Rabbāniyya,
one of central books of the Tijāniyya, provides a lengthy
explanation of this. The author said that Allah appoints for the
aspirant a brother in the spiritual path, who will take on himself
the burdens of his spiritual training. Allah the Exalted will show
the aspirant the secret of his specialness, and remove from
between them the veil of the guide’s human nature. He will
travel with his guide toward Allah the Exalted, secretly and
openly.
Whoever attains spiritual illumination (fata╕a) in this
manner, his light will be complete, for the illumination is
126 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
commensurate with the one followed. This is why Shaykh
Zarrūq said, “Each individual’s illumination and light is
commensurate with the illumination and light of the one he
follows.” If someone receives directly from the texts of the
Qur’ān and the Sunnah, his illumination and light will be
complete, provided that he is one of those qualified to receive
from them. In doing so, however, he is failing to take
advantage of the light and illumination of exemplary
guidance. So the Imams were wary of this approach, to the
point where Ibn Madīnī,2 may Allah have mercy on him, said,
“Ibn Mahdī3 used to go by the word of Mālik, while Mālik
used to go by the word of Sulaymān b. Yasār,4 and Sulaymān
used to go by the word of ‘Umar b. al-Kha╙╙āb. The doctrine of
Mālik is therefore the doctrine of ‘Umar !.” Junayd, may
Allah have mercy on him, said:
Whoever did not hear the traditions by sitting with scholars of
understanding and by receiving proper manners from the
morally refined, he will have a corrupting influence on those
who follow him. Allah the Exalted said, “Say, ‘This is my way.
On clear evidence, I call to Allah, I and all my followers. Glory
be to Allah! And I am not among the idolaters” (Qur’ān, 12:108).
And the Glorious One said: “And this path of Mine is straight, so
follow it. Follow not other ways, less you be parted from His

2. ‘Alī b. al-Madīnī (d. 848, Iraq) was a prominent ╔adīth scholar who
authored a work on the companions of the Prophet, Kitāb al-Ma’rifat al-
╖a╕āba.
3. ‘Abd al-Ra╕mān b. Mahdī was one of the students of the Imam Mālik and
his school of jurisprudence.
4. Sulayman b. Yasār (d. 733) was known as one of the seven scholars of
Medina for his role in transmitting Islamic knowledge in the first century
after the passing of the Prophet, peace be upon him. He was a slave of
Maymuna bint al-Harith (the wife of the Prophet), who attained his freedom
and became overseer of the Medina market during the time of ‘Umar b. alKha╙╙āb.
The Sphere of Spiritual Training in the Tariqa Tijāniyya 127
way. This has He ordained for you, that you may fear Him”
(6:153). So understand this well.
There is no harm at this juncture in presenting some of our
poems on this subject, for they contain useful advice for the
truthful person. Some of the following poetic verses concern the
spiritual traveler (sālik), while some concern the enraptured one
(majdhūb).
Here is advice to anyone who would listen
The one questing hastily for the path of the guided ones
Let him take the spiritual path of the Shaykh (Tijānī), with
permission from its people
Not all of them are alike, so keep companionship with the one
who follows
This litany is nothing except asking for forgiveness, then
declaring the Oneness of Allah
Along with invoking blessing on the chosen one; and avoiding
combining (litanies)
And this with the condition of the heart’s attentiveness, and
leaving aside looking
This way and that among the creation: listen well and protect
yourself with this advice
Do not rely on anything except the grace (fa╓l) of our Lord
Since you are full of limitations, you are of no benefit to yourself
This by way of witnessing the favors of our God
So do not be taken with yourself, be humble
Think well of Allah, whatever may happen
And entrust your affairs completely to Him, let yourself be
crushed in trembling fear
Blessings and peace from the Real throughout all time
On the first of existence, the most comprehensive being.
128 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
There are also the verses:
Leave behind your dwellings and the beautiful women
Leave the laden tables and soft couches
And keep company with any master successful in combining
The Sacred Law (sharī’a) and the Divine Reality (╕aqīqa)
A brother, pious and ascetic, uninterested
In anything beyond what is right and proper
Beware of vain desires, and beware
The brother wrapped up in the passing of time
(To the pious brother) grant him sovereign leadership, since you
know
There is none above him in this affair
Certainly he has obliterated external appearance
And has been made to arrive in the Presence of Holiness
Brought close, sanctified, and summoned
By Divine permission, with the speech of everything near (to
Allah)
When you see such a person, congratulations to you on the
occasion of arrival
For seeing him is a most glorious treasure to the eyes
So the blessing of Allah, together with peace
Upon the chosen one, from the first to the last
These verses are also from us:
I advise you all, fellow companions
To be patient and forgive your brethren
Do not concern yourself with hearsay
Occupy the heart with the Prayer of Opening (╗alāt al-fātih)
So you will come to know, what our God wills is
Not what you might wish.
The Sphere of Spiritual Training in the Tariqa Tijāniyya 129
Also belonging to us:
Beware of your ego-selves, if you would be rightly guided
The one going astray cannot harm the spiritual guide
Whenever you are told, “You are in error,”
Content yourself with knowledge of the Majestic Guardian Lord.
If the brother of communion should sever the communion
We fret not, for our communion is with the Guardian Lord
If you should happen upon what they say (foolishly), be
generous
The brother of perfection is not diminished by words
Also there are the verses:
Mu╕ammad b. Mālik,5 take up the remembrance
Of our litanies, and keep your heart attentive
Flee from the entirety of the creation and their influence
Seek your Guardian-Lord, and abandon other than Him
This advice suffices you, and suffices
Every aspirant, for this is for you from me.
Also belonging to us are the verses:
O enraptured one, I advise you not to travel (this path)
For your own sake, rather (let it be) for the sake of the Real, Most
High
Do not travel from non-existence for (the sake of) non-existence
For that is the work of a foolish, blind man
Indeed this lower world
All of it, including the world on high
Contains nothing that can bring benefit or cause harm

5. Mu╕ammad b. Mālik was one of Shaykh Ibrāhīm’s early disciples whom
Shaykh Ibrāhīm was giving tarbiya at the time of the composition of these
verses (Interview with Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-Mā╕ī Cisse, Medina Kaolack,
March 13, 2009).
130 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
So in order to meet with the One who causes, leave aside the
cause
Betake yourself to Allah, and do not trouble yourself
With other than Him, for this is the devotion (taqwa) of the saint
The matter is not about the discovery of created things
Or about peeping into unseen affairs
Allah is nearer, more exalted and more majestic
So spend your time in (seeking) Allah, the Glorious
Invoke blessings on the Messenger, the selected one
To him belongs the means of access, even before his selection
So blessings on him from Allah, so long as purity
Manifests in the heart’s stillness.
There are also the verses:
O enraptured one! If you do not travel the difficulties of the path
Alas for you, you are incomplete; so continue seeking
O seeker! If you do not become enraptured
You remain veiled, so move and bestir yourself!
The perfected one is he who combines
The two states of rapture and seeking, it is he who progresses
with speed
May Allah include us among such perfected ones
Who have become truly enraptured, but continued traveling the
path
By the blessing of the son of al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah (Niasse)
The spiritual guide for every heedless one
Appointed as Imam of the people of the Tijānī Fayda
The proof of gnosis (‘irfān) in his age
By the blessing of the Saintly Seal of our Tijānī company (silk)
And by the blessing of his grandfather, the ‘Adnānī Prophet
The Sphere of Spiritual Training in the Tariqa Tijāniyya 131
May the prayer of Allah be on him forever, eternity without end
From before the beginning of an eternity without beginning
For Allah is the One, Unique.
To us belong these verses as well:
The arrived ones should not assume leadership
Before permission is granted, for the secret is concealed
I am pleased with the long silence
For it is an indication of gnosis, and of an informed state
There is no good in (mystical) interpretation at every gathering
For secrets are removed with public mention
May Allah, Lord of the Throne, care for us, by the secret of His
secret
Upon him the blessing of Allah, for he is the disposer.
He who desires something more on this subject should
keep company with the men of spiritual distinction, and serve
the people of spiritual perfection.
This concludes what we wished to gather in this chapter.
With Allah is the success on the straight path, and to Him is
the return and final destination.
Section III
135
CHAPTER 1
Warning Against Criticizing the
Spiritual Elite, and Those for Whom
Criticism in Permissible
With Allah is all success, and He is the Guide by His
grace to the straight path.
t is incumbent on the one who is concerned for his own
safety and that of his religion to flee from getting involved
in criticizing Allah’s saints. By criticism I mean slanderous
defamation, showing hostility, looking for their weaknesses or
mistakes, and denying the special favors Allah has bestowed
on them out of envy and hatred. There is no reward for getting
involved in any of this except a painful punishment. Indeed, it
has been said that the reward is no less than being forbidden
from the Presence of Allah, the loss of one’s religion and an
evil end. This is the result of waging war against Allah, the
Vanquisher, the One endowed with severe force.
Imam al-Sha’rānī said, “No one ever criticizes something
coming from Allah’s saints, those blessed with spiritual
I
136 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
unveiling, except that he is punished with deprivation from
the Divine Presence. This is true even if the critic is himself a
saint, no matter his spiritual station.” He also reported the
statement of his shaykh, Sīdī Mu╕ammad al-Maghribī: “If
Allah wishes his servant to be stripped of faith by the time he
dies, He will set him like a dog on one of His saints, bent on
harming him.”
The enmity of Allah’s saints is the definition of “coming to
a bad end.” Indeed, Imam al-Ghazālī said in I╕yā’ (‘Ulūm alDīn):
Suppose you were to ask, “What most people are afraid of is
coming to an evil end, so what is the meaning of coming to an
evil end?” The answer would be: Coming to an evil end has two
levels, the first more terrible than the second. The first most
horrifying level is for the heart to be dominated with doubt or
rejection of faith at the time of death’s agony, so in the end, one’s
life-spirit is removed while in this state. In this case, the knot of
doubt and unbelief forms a veil between him and Allah forever,
causing permanent banishment and everlasting torment.
The second, less horrifying level is for the heart to be
engaged in passions and lust for worldly things at the time of
death’s agony. One’s heart is so engrossed that no room remains
in his heart for anything else. So the life-spirit is removed while
his attention and body are totally directed towards the world. So
long as one’s attention is directed away from Allah, a veil exists.
And where there is a veil, there descends the punishment, since
the blazing Hellfire does not seize any but those who are veiled
from Him.
These words of al-Ghazālī are confirmed by the statement
of Allah the Most High: “No indeed, but on that day they will
be veiled from their Lord, then they shall enter the blazing
Fire” (Qur’ān, 83:15-16). It has been said in al-╘arā’if wa al-
Warning Against Criticizing the Spiritual Elite 137
Talā’id:1 “No matter how hard we look, we have yet to find a
scholar of jurisprudence who denied and criticized the Sufis
that Allah did not destroy with a disastrous end.” ‘Alī alKhawwā╗, as reported in Latā’if al-Minan, said:
Just as it is imperative to have faith in all the Prophets without
exception, to believe in them and love them, the same applies to
the saints of Allah. If someone should believe in all the saints
except one, without a valid legal reason, this person thereby has
denied all of the saints and declared war on Allah. Whoever
rejects the claim of a saint has rejected the claim of a Prophet.
Imam al-Sha’rānī related:
Ibn Labbān slandered Sīdī A╕mad al-Badawī, may Allah bestow
His mercy on him, and consequently lost his memory of the
Glorious Qur’ān and other knowledge. But he persisted in
seeking intercession from the saints, until he was guided to Sīdī
Yaqūt al-‘Arshī, who came to the tomb of A╕mad al-Badawī (on
his behalf). He addressed him, “O you father of spiritual heroes!
Restore to this wretched one his wealth!” Sīdī A╕mad replied,
“Only if he repents.” So he repented, and his wealth (of
knowledge) was restored to him.
He went on to say:
Our Shaykh al-Shinnāwī informed me that a certain person
criticized the birthday celebration of Sīdī A╕mad al-Badawī,2 so
he was stripped of his faith to the point where he felt not the

1 . al-╘arā’if wa al-Talā’id bi Karamāt al-Shaykhayn al-Wālida wa al-Wālid is the
work of Mu╕ammad al-Kuntī, the son of Shaykh al-Mukhtār al-Kuntī, who
dedicated the book to his parents. Researchers have had difficulty locating a
copy of this work in its complete form (see Abdel Wedoud Ould Cheikh,
“Harun Wuld al-Shaikh Sīdīyya,” in Triaud and Robinson, eds., Le Temps des
Marabouts (Karthala, 1997), p. 209); Shaykh Ibrāhīm’s reference to this work
is an indication of his extensive manuscript collection.
2. Shaykh A╕mad al-Badawī (d. 1276) became one of the most popular saints
of Egypt. His mawlid (birthday celebration) in Tanta is attended by
thousands every year.
138 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
slightest trace of longing for Islam. So he sought help from Sīdī
A╕mad, who told him, “On the condition that you do not repeat
your offense.” He agreed, and was restored the garment of his
faith. Then Sīdī A╕mad asked him, “What was it you were
criticizing?” The man replied, “The intermingling of men and
women (at your celebration).” Sīdī A╕mad answered, “That
happens during the circumambulation of the Sacred House
during Pilgrimage, and no one is prevented from performing the
pilgrimage (because of that).”
Al-Yadālī relates Ibn Hajar’s saying, “The affair of the
three individuals – Sīdī ‘Abd al-Qādir al-Jīlānī as a youth, Ibn
Saqā, and Abū Sa’īd b. Abī Asrūn – who went to visit the
spiritual succor (al-ghawth) provides a most forceful warning
against negative criticism of the saints.” Their story is well
known, and will not be delved into for now.3
The one who maligns the honor of a saint and is not
immediately afflicted by misfortune, should not assume his
immunity from Allah's vengeance. Indeed, his affliction could
be more disastrous, since he may be afflicted in his religion.
Ibn ‘Atā Allah has said: “The consequence (of maligning a
saint) could be the hardening of his heart, or the development
of incorrect views on religious issues, or difficulty in
performing obligatory worship, or perpetual engagement in
sinful acts. The refuge is with Allah the Most High.” In La╙ā’if
al-Minan,4 Ibn ‘Atā Allah has given the following wise counsel
and guidance:

3. Shaykh Ibrāhīm includes the full story in the fourth section of the
Appendix.
4. Both Ibn ‘A╙ā Allah and al-Sha’rānī authored books called Latā’if al-Minan.
This is the first reference to Ibn ‘A╙ā Allah’s version, Kitāb al-Latā’if fi manāqib
Abī al-‘Abbās al-Mursī wa Shaykhihi Abī al-Hasan, a book which concerns the
founders of the Shadhiliyya Sufi path.
Warning Against Criticizing the Spiritual Elite 139
Beware, O brother, of listening to those who slander and ridicule
the Sufis so that you do not fall out of Allah’s good pleasure and
make yourself worthy of His displeasure. These Sufi people are
with Allah, established in the reality of truthfulness, sincerity
and genuine fidelity. With each breath, they vigilantly monitor
their relationship with Allah. They have surrendered themselves
completely before Him. They have abandoned seeking assistance
for themselves in shyness of His Lordship over them, becoming
content with His infinite provision. Indeed, He provides them
with the fullest of provisions.
It is He who fights for them against those who wage war on
them, and it is He who vanquishes those who would triumph
over them. Allah the Glorious has tested the Sufis with criticism
from their fellow creatures, especially from the scholars of
exoteric knowledge. You will seldom find anyone among them
whose heart Allah has expanded to believe in a particular saint.
He is more likely to say to you, “Yes, we know that the saints do
exist, but where are they?” Then, if you mention one to him, he
will proceed to refute the special qualities with which Allah has
endowed him. And he will do so with eloquent arguments, but
arguments devoid of the light of belief. So be on guard against
the one who matches this description, and flee from him as you
would flee from the lion. May Allah, by His gracious favor and
noble generosity, include us among those who believe in His
saints, for surely He has power over all things.
The author of al-Rimā╕ (‘Umar al-Fūtī), distinguished for
his deep probing of the sciences of Divine Reality and the
Sacred Law, has said:
Among the disgusting attributes of negative criticism of Allah’s
saints is that you find such critics following the path of the Jews,
the idolaters and the hypocrites. So there is no doubt Allah the
Exalted will make them suffer a punishment similar to the
140 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
punishment He inflicts on these people, for they are
characterized by the same attributes.
Another bad behavior of theirs is their preference for
immoral folk as companions, such as disobedient sinners and
transgressors.
Another bad attribute is their maintaining that the practice
of the kings, the tyrants and their helpers constitute the true
religion and the straight path. So the false path, in their minds, is
that of the scholars concerned with the Hereafter, and the
honorable men who call upon their Lord morning and evening,
seeking His Countenance.
Another bad attribute is their belief that the blameworthy
habits and heretical innovations inherited from misguided
ancient traditions are part of the Sunnah of Allah’s Messenger !
and his close followers.
They also have the chronic malady of envy which prevented
the Jews from following the Prophet ! for fear of losing their
leadership positions. Allah the Most High has said, “Or are they
jealous of people for that which Allah has blessed them out of
His bountiful grace?” (Qur’ān, 4:54). In another verse He said,
“Have you not seen those who have received a portion of the
Scriptures, when called to accept the judgment of Allah’s Book
between them, some turn their backs and pay no heed?” (3:23).
If you pay close attention, you will find in this magnificent
speech of the saintly pole, ‘Umar al-Fūtī, that which uncovers
the dangerous conditions of the negative critics. According to
the Ba╕r al-Mawrūd:
The solemn oaths extracted from us require that we (of the Sufi
path) not accuse the righteous of lying when they inform us of
something our minds consider impossible. The exception is if it
contradicts the Sacred Law. Their purpose in telling us these
things may only be to inform us that Allah is able to do anything
He wills, nothing else.
Warning Against Criticizing the Spiritual Elite 141
As quoted in al-Sha’rānī’s al-Yawāqīt wa al-Jawāhir, Shaykh
al-Islam al-Makhzūmī5 said:
It is not permissible for a scholar (‘ālim) to criticize a Sufi unless
he treads their path (╙arīq) and sees him contradicting the
Sunnah. The scholar may not criticize the Sufis until he is fully
acquainted with seventy matters, including but not limited to the
following: 1) The understanding of their technical vocabulary:
the essential and superficial manifestations; and the meaning of
“Essence” (dhāt), and the meaning of the Essence of the Essence.
2) The knowledge of the Presence of the Names and Attributes,
and the difference between the Divine Presences, and the
difference between (the Presences of) Unique Oneness (a╕adiyya)
and Singularity (wā╕idiyya). 3) The awareness of the secret of the
manifest and the hidden, and of pre-eternity (azal) and
perpetuity (abad), the world of the unseen (ghayb), the universe
(kawn), the secret of witnessing (shahāda) and longing (shawq). 4)
The knowledge of the subtle nature of things (māhiyya) and
Divine Identity (huwiyya); and of spiritual intoxication (sukr) and
love; and how to recognize the one who is truly spiritually
intoxicated, deserving forbearance, and one who is lying,
deserving censure.
Shaykh Sīdī Mukhtār Kuntī, the Imam and magnanimous
spiritual guide, said in his appendix:
Qutb al-Dīn al-Shīrāzī6 said, “As for the riff-raff’s censure of the
(spiritual) elite, this does not detract from their high-ranking

5. ‘Umar b. Mūs “Sirāj al-Dīn” al-Makhzūmī (15th century) was head judge
of his time in Damascus. He was the student of Sirāj al-Dīn al-Bulqini, a
famous ╔adīth specialist. Both Bulqini and Makhzūmī came to defend Ibn
al-‘Arabī, Bulqini after originally criticizing him. Jalāl al-Dīn Suyū╙ī listed alMakhzūmī as one of his teachers.
6. Qutb al-Dīn al-Shirāzī (d. 1311) was a Persian Sufi, mathematician,
astronomer and physician. His most famous work on Sufism is Durrat al-Tāj
li ghurratt al-Dubāj; but he also wrote on planetary movement and the
possibility of heliocentrism.
142 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
offices, just as the Prophetic mission is not impaired by people
accusing the Prophets of sorcery, possession and the like.”
According to Sahl b. Abd-Allah al-Tustārī,7 “When you see
someone reviling the saints (‘awliyā’) and disparaging the
talents of the bosom friends (asfiyā’), know that person is at
war with Allah and His Messenger.” Abū Yazīd (al-Bistāmī)
said, “The flesh of the saints is poisonous, and Allah’s custom
in dealing with those who hate them is well known. If
someone defames them, Allah will afflict him before his death
with a death of the heart: ‘So let those who go against the His
command beware, lest a trial or painful torment befall them’
(Qur’ān, 24:63).” Shaykh Abū ‘Abd-Allah al-Qurashī8 said, “If
someone belittles a saint of Allah, his heart will be struck by a
poisoned arrow, and he will not die until his faith has become
corrupted.”
According to al-Ghazālī, “If someone possesses no portion
of the knowledge of the (Sufi) people, he is in danger of
coming to a bad end. The least portion of this knowledge is to
believe (in its existence) and to accept its possessors.” He also
said,
The saintly substitutes (‘abdāl)9 have isolated themselves in the

7. Sahl al-Tustārī (d. 896) was an influential figure in the early development
of Sufism. Al-Qushayri said of him, “He had no peer in his time for correct
transactions and fearing Allah, and he was a man of miraculous
occurrences.”
8. Abū ‘Abd-Allah al-Qurashī was an early Sufi known for his visionary
encounters with Khi╓r, the mystical guide of Moses in the Qur’ān.
9. The abdāl are so called because when one of them dies, Allah is said to
substitute another in his place. According to a ╔adīth related on the
authority of ‘Alī and found in A╕mad b. Hanbal’s Musnad, “The saintly
substitutes (‘abdāl) are in Syria and they are forty men, every time one of
them dies, Allah substitutes another in his place. By means of them Allah
brings down the rain, gives (Muslims) victory over their enemies, and averts
punishment from the people of Syria.” Anas relates a similar ╔adīth (found
in ╘abarānī), but without the reference to Syria.
Warning Against Criticizing the Spiritual Elite 143
extreme regions of the earth, concealing themselves from the
eyes of the general public. They do not pay attention to the
scholars of the time, whom they regard as ignorant of Allah.
They see themselves as scholars, and consider avoiding the
ignorant to be among the virtues of true believers, as Allah has
said, “And turn away from the ignorant” (7:199).
Imam al-Nawawī has thus declared it strictly unlawful for
any intelligent person to hold a bad opinion of Allah’s saints.
Rather, he must interpret favorably their sayings and actions,
even if he does not attach himself to them or participate in
their spiritual experiences. Shaykh Badr al-Dīn al-Zarkashī10
said in this regard:
Any formal legal opinion (fatwā) against the Sufi people should
be ignored, unless its author has first made a thorough study of
their technical terminology and understood the real meanings of
their expressions. This is similar to the way the jurist ignores the
fatwā of someone who may be an expert in grammar and u╗ūl11
but has not ascertained the realities of the Qur’ān and the
Sunnah and understood the basic principles of jurisprudence.
The sciences of grammar and u╗ūl are simply tools for studying
jurisprudence; they are not jurisprudence itself, so mastery of
them does not give a person adequate proficiency for issuing a
fatwā. He who does so has only gone astray and is leading others
astray.
The same applies to someone with no understanding of the
technical terminology of the Sufi people. He regards them with
suspicion when he hears them speak because he does not
understand their intentions or the meaning of their symbolism.
For example, he will be critical when he hears the statement,

10. Imam Badr al-Dīn al-Zarkashi al-Shāfi’ī (d. 1392) was a renowned scholar
of Qur’ān and ╔adīth sciences and an expert on Shāfi’ī jurisprudence.
11 . The science of u╗ūl refers to the methodology, or basic principles
involved in ascertaining knowledge, jurisprudence or otherwise.
144 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
“The reality of repentance is repentance of repentance.” But he
will refrain from criticism when he realizes that what is meant
here is the suspicion of the self with regard to false pretenses and
the sincerity of repentance. Even more shocking is the statement,
“The Lord is a servant and servant is a lord.” When he hears this,
the one with no spiritual experience will demand the execution
of the one who says it. His response will be different, however,
when he understands what is actually meant: namely, that when
a servant devotes himself utterly to his Master, becoming extinct
in His good pleasure and disappearing from his own presence
into His Presence, the Lord empowers him with enormous
power, putting the command at his disposal. If the servant says
“Be!” it will be; and this by the creative power of the Creator
Himself. As our Shaykh Jīlī12 said in poetic verse,
My command is by Allah’s command. If I say: “Be!” It comes
into being.
Everything is at Allah’s command, so judge the extent of my
power!
Imam al-Haramayn used to say:
Suppose we were asked to provide a standard by which the
statements of the Sufi people could be charged with unbelief or
misguidance. Our response would be that this can hardly be
determined, being a matter far beyond ordinary comprehension,
a disgraceful course since the matter flows from the ocean
currents of Divine Oneness (taw╕īd). If someone is not endowed
with comprehensive knowledge of the ultimate extent of the
Divine realities, he is not qualified to issue certificates of
unbelief. Such a person is therefore like one digging his own
grave, or one who sets himself on fire. His intention is to find

12. Abd al-Karīm al-Jīlī (d. 1403) was born in Baghdad but traveled
extensively throughout the Muslim world, including Yemen and India. He
was a staunch defender of Ibn al-‘Arabi. His most influential work was alInsān al-Kāmil.
Warning Against Criticizing the Spiritual Elite 145
unbelief in another person, but his arrow will pierce his own
throat.
Al-Nawawī used to say:
Since Allah bestowed charismatic miracles (karamāt) on His
saints as a branch of Prophetic miracles (mu’jizāt), it is not
surprising He also granted them with modes of expression
which incapacitate even the most outstanding scholars, let alone
others. This is because the saints derive their support from Allah
and His Messenger. “So no soul knows what comfort is kept
secretly in store for them, as a reward for what they used to do”
(Qur’ān, 32:17).
The saints, for the sake of Allah, have broken through the
confines of their ego-selves and ordinary conditions, so for them
ordinary conditions have been rent apart. They have become the
ones who give expression to Allah’s Majesty with His consent,
and who are protected by Allah’s watchful care.
Shaykh al-Islam al-Makhzūmi said:
A servant must master six subjects of knowledge before he
engages in negative criticism (inkār):
1) The first such science to master is that of holding a good
opinion (╕usna al-╛ann) of Allah’s saints, in order to draw
near to their presence and to honor their goals. Surely,
whoever has a bad opinion of the saints will be banished
from their presence, and whoever is banished from their
presence is banished from the presence of Allah and His
Messenger. All lights will desert him and all secrets will
elude him, for how can the lights be seen by someone
whose eyesight is obscured by clouds of darkness and
vexation. Allah the Exalted has said, “No indeed, their
own deeds have cast a veil over their hearts” (Qur’ān,
83:14). And He described this state by saying, “Layer
upon layer of darkness. If he reaches out his hand, he
146 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
can hardly see it. And he to whom Allah has not given
light, for him there is no light” (24:40).
2) He must have studied the miracles of the Prophets
(mu’jizāt) and the saints (karāmāt).
3) He must have studied diligently the books of Qur’ānic
exegesis (tafsīr) and interpretation (ta’wīl), thereby
acquiring intimate knowledge of the Qur’ān and the
Sunnah.
4) He must frequently contemplate the Qur’ānic verses and
relevant reports concerning the Divine Attributes. He
must have studied thoroughly everything said on the
subject by the righteous early believers and their
successors. He must know those who take the Attributes
literally, and those whose interpretation is based on the
Attribute’s connotation; and who has the stronger and
more convincing proof.13
5) He must frequently delve into the methods of the
independent legal scholars (mujtahidīn), examining the
proofs on which they rely derived from the Qur’ān, the
Sunnah and analogy (qiyās).
6) Most importantly, he must be familiar with the technical
terms of the Sufi people. Such terms are used to explain
a long list of realities, such as essential and superficial
manifestations (al-tajallī al-dhātī wa al-sūrī), the complex
of spiritual stations (maqāmāt), the types of mystical
experience (dhawq), spiritual intoxication (sukr),
obliteration (ma╕w), annihilation (fanā’), and extraworldly encounters (mukāfa╕āt). He who has not been
promoted to such spiritual stations (maqāmāt), who has
not smelled the perfume of the Divine manifestations,
who has not tasted of the fruit hanging suspended in the

13. This refers to a long-standing debate in Islamic theology: whether Allah’s
Attributes (such as Hand, Eye, or the act of sitting on the Throne) are to be
taken literally or not.
Warning Against Criticizing the Spiritual Elite 147
Divine Presence, who has not sipped from the oceans of
sainthood; how can he be permitted to judge their
words, their conduct or their spiritual stations? He is
criticizing something from he has been cut off. The saints
are suns, whose rays are obscured by the cataracts of the
eye. Their voices are not heard, except by someone who
speaks in a whisper.
In Ba╕r al-Mawrūd, Imam al-Sha’rānī said:
We have solemnly vowed not to allow any our (Muslim)
brethren to criticize others for contradicting the teaching of a
religious scholar. Criticism is only possible if one has
comprehensive knowledge of the Sharī’a and its procedures, and
has not discovered any difference of opinion (concerning the
relevant contradiction). This (lack of diverging opinion) is
something that happens very rarely. All of this is just to deter
criticism without knowledge.
It has been related in al-╘abarānī that Allah’s Messenger !
once said: “My sacred way (sharī’a) has come by 313 paths
(╙arīqa). Whoever meets his Lord through one of these paths,
he will surely enter Paradise.”14 The greatest shaykh and
saintly pole ‘Abd al-‘Azīz al-Dabbāgh was recorded in alDhahab al-Ibrīz as saying:

14. Al-╔ājj Umar also cites this ╔adīth in a polemical exchange with
Mu╕ammad al-Amin al-Kanami (of Bornu) and explains, “If you were
actually informed about all these ways, my friend, and then discovered a
rule contrary to them, then you would be in a position to object to them.
Otherwise, acceptance (of an unfamiliar way) is better for you, and is to be
preferred, since it is impossible to encounter someone who is informed on all
313 ways.” See John Willis, In the Path of Allah: The Passion of al-╔ājj Umar: an
Essay into the Nature of Charisma in Islam (Routledge, 1989), p. 90-91. The
╔adīth was also cited by Shehu Usmane dan Fodio (d. 1817, Nigeria) in
Najm al-Ikhwān. The reader of the Arabic text should be aware that the 2001
Arabic printing of the Kāshif accidently omits the pronominal suffix on the
word rabb (Lord or master), altering the meaning a good deal.
148 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
You should know, may Allah enable you to succeed, that the
illuminated saint is fully aware of the Truth and the best course
(sawāb). He does not attach himself to any particular doctrine
among the schools of jurisprudence (madhāhib). Even if these
schools were to be shut down, he would be able to revive the
Sacred Law. How could it be otherwise? The Prophet is not
absent from him for the twinkling of an eye, and there is not an
instant in which he is not witnessing the Real, exalted is His
Majesty. In his ruling on issues of obligation and other matters,
he is endowed with intimate knowledge of Prophet’s intent
(murād) and the Will (murād) of the Real. This being the case, he
is the authoritative source (hujja) over all others, and no one has
authority over him since he is closer to the Truth than those who
have not been illuminated. How then is it permissible to criticize
someone with this description, saying he has contradicted the
doctrine (madhhab) of so-and-so in regards to such-and-such?
The one who criticizes the illuminated saint must surely fall
into one of the following categories:
He is ignorant of the Sacred Law. This is the usual condition
of the negative critics. Criticism is of course improper for such a
person, for the blind man can never deny the sight of one who
sees. This person should rather work diligently to rid himself of
his ignorance.
He is a scholar (‘ālim) of one of the schools of jurisprudence,
but ignorant of the other schools. Such a scholar is unlikely to
engage in negative criticism unless he has become convinced
that the truth is confined to his school alone, and thus has
become unable to accept its existence elsewhere. There are both
rightly guided scholars and those in error who have escaped this
conviction. The rightly guided ones realize that the truth is
found in every school, and see them all on the right path. Their
view is that Allah’s ruling may be determined in a variety of
ways according to the reasoning of a consummate legal scholar
(mujtahid). If one such scholar finds something prohibited, that is
Warning Against Criticizing the Spiritual Elite 149
Allah’s ruling; but if another finds it permissible, that is also
Allah’s ruling. As for the scholars in error (who do not limit
themselves to one school), they believe Allah only has one
ruling, but they do not restrict it to the doctrine of a particular
school. The truth for them is limited to whatever a particular
Imam says it is, or in another case whatever someone else says it
to be (but both cannot be right at the same time). The negative
critic who falls into this category should be devoting his
attention to ridding himself of his unsound conviction (instead
of engaging in criticism).
There is also the case of the scholar who may be well-versed
in the all four schools of jurisprudence.15 He is unlikely to
engage in negative criticism, unless he has become convinced
that the truth is wholly absent from any of doctrines of the
scholars (outside the four schools). He thus rejects scholars such
as al-Thawrī, al-Awzā’ī, Ibn Jurayh, ‘Ikrima, Mujāhid, Ma’bar,
‘Abd al-Razzāq, al-Bukhārī, Muslim, Ibn Jarīr, Ibn Khuzayma,
Ibn al-Mundhir, Tāwūs, al-Nakha’ī, Qatāda, and others from
among the early generations (tābi’īn) as far back as the
companions of the Prophet, may Allah be well pleased with
them all. This conviction is unsound. He should devote his time
to something else besides preoccupying himself with negative
criticism of Allah’s illuminated saints.
At this point, you will have understood that negative
criticism of (the people) of the Reality (╕aqīqa) is not permissible,
except by one who has comprehensive knowledge of the Sacred
Law (sharī’a). No one has such comprehensive knowledge except
the Prophet and his perfect inheritors, like the saintly succors
(aghwāth) in every age. As for others, their silence is best for
them!
Our discussion so far has concerned the criticism of the
people of Truth (ahl al-╔aqq) by enlightened folk (ahl al-fat╕). But

15. Thus Hanafi, Māliki, Shāfi’ī and Hanbali.
150 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
the statements of the people of darkness and misguidance also
are not unfamiliar to those who have to deal with them. A
certain person once sought permission from his shaykh that
enlightened folk be able to criticize the saints, the people of
Truth. He said, “My master, I will criticize them only where they
depart from the Sacred Law. If I find someone on the right path,
I will submit to him. If I find someone deviating from it, I will
criticize him.” His shaykh said, “I am afraid you are not
equipped to with all the tools needed to weigh (the truth).
Having only some of the tools, but not others, your scale will not
be accurate, pointing only to what other ignorant people have
done before.”
I once met an intelligent and shrewd man. He (told me he
once) heard somebody asking an illuminated saint, “Suppose
somebody making the ritual prayer forgets to recite a (second)
Qur’ān Chapter (sūrah) after the “Mother of the Qur’ān” (the
Opening Chapter, al-Fati╕a). He then forgets the compensatory
act of (extra) prostration until after he has pronounced the final
salutation. Is his ritual prayer invalidated by the omission of the
compensatory act of prostration – on the basis of the assertion of
there being three traditional rules (sunan) concerning the
(recitation of the second) sūrah – or does it remain valid? Shaykh
Kha╙╙āb 16 and others considered it invalid, 17 but the
commentators of the Risāla18 considered the prayer still valid.”
The illuminated saint responded to the petitioner by saying,

16. Possibly Abū al-Khattab al-Kalwadhani (d. 1116, Baghdad), a prominent
independent scholar (mujtahid) of the Hanbali school.
17. Others would include ‘Abd al-Ra╕mān al-Akhdarī (d. 1585, Algeria), in
whose classic summary of Maliki fiqh it is said (translation by Aisha Bewly),
“If someone forgets the (second) sura, or recites aloud or silently in the nafila
(supererogatory prayer) and remembers after the ruku', he continues and
does not owe any prostration, which is not the case with the fard
(obligatory) prayer.”
18. The Risāla of Qā╓ī ‘Abd-Allah b. Abī Zayd al-Qayrawānī (d. 996, Fes) is
one of the primary treatises on jurisprudence from the Maliki school and has
been commented on by many scholars of jurisprudence since.
Warning Against Criticizing the Spiritual Elite 151
“The truth from Allah is that the omission of the (second) sūrah
absolutely does not require compensatory prostration. If
someone does make the compensatory prostration because of it,
then his ritual prayer is rendered null and void.”
The illuminated saint happened to be blind and illiterate.
Nonetheless the inquirer knew him well and recognized his lofty
spiritual station. When he heard the response, he knew it was
the truth and had no doubt. But the shrewd man (who related
the story to me) was filled with doubt and suspicion. He said to
the inquirer after leaving the saint, “This man is an ignoramus.
Do you see how he was ignorant of Allah’s judgment on this
simple problem? He said that no act of compensatory prostration
is incumbent on someone who omits the (second) sūrah, even
though Ibn Rushd 19 included it among the established
customary practices, similar to the audible and inaudible
recitations.” The inquirer replied that the illuminated saint does
not attach himself to a particular school (madhhab), but that he
revolves with the Truth wherever it revolves. The shrewd man,
who was a student of the classical Islamic sciences, said, “We do
not depart from the teachings of our Imam Mālik.” The inquirer
responded to this by saying, “The statement made by the
illuminated saint has been reported by Ashhab20 on the authority
of Malik, as related in al-Taw╓ī╕. It has also been reported on the
Imam’s authority that the (recitation of the second) sūrah is
indeed highly recommended, but it is not one of the prescribed
traditional practices (requiring compensation for being missed).
This was also the doctrine (madhhab) of al-Shāfi’ī !. He

19. Qā╓ī Mu╕ammad Ibn Rushd (d. 1198, Andalusia), known in Europe as
Averroes, was an important figure for Maliki jurisprudence even if he
became more famous as a philosopher and physician. His book Bidayat alMujtahid is still studied by advanced students of Islamic jurisprudence.
20. Ashhab b. ‘Abd al-‘Azīz al-Amiri (d. 819) was one of the primary
students of Imam Mālik and author of a book called Mudawwana, though
this should not be confused with the more famous Mudawwanna of Ashhab’s
student Sa╕nūn.
152 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
considered it one of the virtuous customs, but not one of the
prescribed traditional practices, and if someone performs
prostration to compensate for its omission, his prayer is
rendered null and void. Furthermore, our question to the saint
was only about the identification of the truth without
qualification, not about the well-known doctrine of Mālik’s
school in particular. He answered our question, and his answer
happened to coincide with a report from Mālik as well as the
school of al-Shāfi’ī, may Allah be pleased with them both. So
what charge can be brought against the response of the saint?”
To this, the shrewd person dried up, not knowing what to say.
This is the way of negative critics and their habitual style.
You will not find anything with them except complete
inadequacy. One of the great jurists among our shaykhs, may
Allah be pleased with them, once engaged me in a discussion in
this connection. He said to me one day, “O Fulān (unnamed
person), because of my affection and perfect love for you, I have
decided to give you some wise counsel.”
I responded, “My master, I regard you with love and
respect, and I am wholly at your disposal.”
He said, “Everybody has criticized a certain man whose
spiritual illumination and sainthood you have confirmed. How
is it possible that all the people deny him, but you alone belief in
him? It is inconceivable that you alone should be on the side of
truth.” He spoke at some length on this matter, but this was the
gist of what he had to say.
Then I said, “My master, in order for your wise counsel to be
complete, first please answer the question I will put to you. If
you can answer it, your wise counsel will be complete and the
reward will be with Allah.”
He ! said, “Ask whatever you wish.”
So I said, “My master, have you met this man, heard his
speech and conferred with him about a particular matter, and
then become convinced of the peoples’ judgment in this regard?”
Warning Against Criticizing the Spiritual Elite 153
He said to me, “I have never met him, and I have never even
seen him.”
Having discarded shyness on account of the intimacy and
loving friendship between us, I said, “My master, in your case, it
is clear to me you have reversed the proper course. You have
tried to bring certainty out of speculation. Certainty can never be
found in speculation. But in the pursuit of certainty, you have
satisfied yourself with speculation, doubt, even lies and false
slander.”
He said to me, “Explain what you mean by this.”
I told him, “When you teach jurisprudence (fiqh), the source
material is available to you directly, from al-Mudawwana21 or the
Tab╗ira of al-Lakhmī22 or the Bayān of Ibn Rushd23 or the Jawāhir
of Ibn Shās,24 and other encyclopedic works of jurisprudence.
You do not need to rely on the reports of intermediaries, even if
they be (people like) Ibn Marzūq,25 al-╔a╙╙āb,26 or the author of
al-Taw╓ī╕. 27 Consulting them (only) would be like using
secondary sources to form your opinion when the established

21. The primary work on Maliki Fiqh by ‘Abd al-Salām b. Sa’id, known as
Sa╕nūn (d. 854, Fes). Sa╕nūn was the student of both Ibn Qasim and
Ashhab, both renowned students of Imam Mālik.
22. ‘Alī b. Mu╕ammad al-Rib’ī, known as al-Lakhmi (d. 1092, Fes), was
another towering figure in the early Maliki jurisprudence.
23. Ibn Rushd’s (d. 1126) Bayān al-Tahsīl wa al-Tawjīh wa ta’līf fi Masā’il alMustakhraja is a massive commentary on the Mustakhraja al-Qurtubi. Note
this Ibn Rushd (Mu╕ammad b. A╕mad) was the grandfather of the more
famous Ibn Rushd al-Hafidh (the grandson).
24. The Jawahir al-Thamina of Abd-Allah b. Mu╕ammad, known as Ibn Shas
(d. 1188, Egypt).
25. There were two famous Maliki jurists named Ibn Marzūq, the one,
Mu╕ammad b. A╕mad Ibn Marzūq (d. 1379, Egypt), was the grandfather of
the second, Mu╕ammad b. A╕mad b. Mu╕ammad Ibn Marzūq al-Tilimsani
(d. 1439, Algeria).
26. Mu╕ammad b. Mu╕ammad ‘Abd al-Ra╕mān al- ╔a╙╙āb (d. 1547, North
Africa) was the author of Muwahib al-Jalil sharh Mukhtasar Khalil.
27. Probably the Tawdīh al-Ahkām min Bulūgh al-Marām, a commentary on Ibn
Hajar al-Asqalani’s Bulugh al-Maram by Abd-Allah b. Abd al-Rahman alBassām. The work concerns ╔adīth relating to issues of jurisprudence.
154 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
and authoritative sources are available to you. You will never
find certainty by intermediary reports. Taking a later
intermediary report is only exchanging a stronger opinion for a
weaker one, for the closer the intermediary report in time to the
author of the source-text, the more reliable the opinion, for these
transmitters are certainly closer than we are to the original
sources. Moreover, the text available to the earlier intermediaries
was transmitted by an unbroken chain from the original sources.
We, however, have no direct chain of transmission to the
original source, or the authentic text at our disposal. Just as your
own text has been tampered with, how can you be certain that
the report of al- ╔a╙╙āb, for example, is attributable to the
original sources?
“As for all of you being content with speculation in the place
of certainty, know that this man you have been informed about
is present, living with you in the town. There is hardly any
distance between the two of you. If Allah enables you to love
him and submit to his guidance, happy is the acquaintance with
him, a happiness after which there is no misfortune! So Allah has
made it possible for you to find him. Now you can believe in
him and enjoy happiness and prosperity, or you can deny him
and be turned away. In either case, certainty will come to you,
and the darkness of doubt will leave your heart. Then, if you
become satisfied to accept this prosperous condition and
prodigious blessing (of submitting to the saint), the benefit of
which is undeniable, you will be enabled to push away the
corruptors and liars. You are usually dissatisfied with
speculation, forming your own opinion on matters with little
recourse to intermediary reports. Why have you not followed
the same course here? Certainty in this domain is to your benefit
and brings clear good fortune. So does this not constitute on
your part a reversal of the right path?”
After listening to all of this, he said, “Your argument has
affected me profoundly. By Allah, I will never be able to respond
Warning Against Criticizing the Spiritual Elite 155
to this! Bear witness that I am repenting to Allah, Almighty and
Glorious is He.”
Then I said to this shaykh, “If you must follow somebody
else’s authority in this, you should follow my lead for two
reasons. First of all, you acknowledge my discernment (ba╗īra) in
things. Secondly, you are aware that I spent many years in the
company of this remarkable man, until I learned from him things
that no one else knows. As for the corrupt liars, most of them,
like you, have never met him. They rely on baseless hearsay, and
their only reason (for such slander) is their own exclusion and
forsakenness. May Allah grant us success by virtue of His Grace,
Favor and Generosity.”
He said, “There is nothing else left for you to say!”
Subsequently, another jurist, in fact one of the shaykhs of the
jurist above, approached me. He said to me, “I have heard you
are someone who can provide decisive proof against any
disputant.” He turned to the same jurist and asked, “Did you not
inform me of a certain person who told you such-and-such?” He
said, “Yes.” And they both said, “You have transformed us both
with this speech of yours.” These two jurists are among the
leading scholars of their age, and no one can match them.
As for the negative critics of lesser ranks, most of them rely
on baseless hearsay, as previously mentioned. The shrewdest of
them supports his criticism by saying, “We used to be associated
with so-and-so, and he was not like that!” meaning the man
being criticized. Such a critic has not understood that flowers
come in various colors:
And date-palms, like and unlike, which are watered with the
same water. And We have made some of them to excel
others in fruit. Surely in that there are signs for those who
understand (Qur’ān, 13:4).
Once the Shaykh ! and I entered a garden in the spring
time. He gazed for a while at the diversity of flowers and
splendors, then turned his head to me and said, “If someone
156 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
wants to understand the diversity (ikhtilāf) of the saints – their
dissimilarity in regard to spiritual stations and states, while all
being righteously guided and able to instill sweetness in the
hearts of the people – let him contemplate the diversity of these
flowers and splendors and the sweetness each one is able to
instill in the heart.” When the critic says, “Sīdī so-and-so, whom
we knew well, was not like this,” his implication is that Allah’s
mercy has been restricted to the saint he knew. He has narrowed
something expansive. The Bedouin who urinated in the mosque
(and was excused by the Prophet despite the protests of his
companions) said, “O Allah, have mercy on me and have mercy
on Mu╕ammad, but do not have mercy to anyone else.” So the
Prophet, Allah bless him and grant him peace, said, “You have
narrowed something wide!” The critic’s assumption in this case
is that no one can be a recipient of Allah’s mercy unless he is like
the saint he knew. But there are different types of saints. And
this principle is applicable to the saint he knew as well, for
certainly this saint was not like the one that preceded him. If the
critic disapproves of the third (most recent) saint because he was
not like the second (whom he knew), he has also disapproved of
the second, because he was not like the first.
I have gone to great length discussing this subject of
negative criticism. I have delved into the arguments with the
jurists, may Allah be pleased with them all, only trying to benefit
them and all seekers of knowledge (‘ilm). I only want to give
them sound advice, out of loving affection for them, for they
have plagued themselves with negative criticism of the pure,
virtuous and righteous masters throughout all centuries and
ages, in all the deserts, villages and cities. This chapter has
covered fully (the reasons) for their criticism. If anyone among
them is fair-minded and considers carefully what we have said
here, he will come to his senses. The truth will become clear to
him, and the right direction apparent. I have been reluctant to
dispute with the jurists concerning the saints. I assumed they
Warning Against Criticizing the Spiritual Elite 157
were basing their criticism on sound foundations, but when I put
them to the test, I found the matter as I have described it. Allah
is the Guide to the right path. There is no lord other than He,
and there is no blessing (khayr) other than His blessing. In Him
have I placed my trust, and to Him do I turn in repentence.
The reference to the saintly succor (ghawth) earlier in the
chapter calls for an account of some of the spiritual stations
with which he is endowed. The greatest shaykh, rare like red
sulfur, the most magnificent secret, Ibn al-‘Arabi al-╔ātimī,
said:
Every spiritual station (maqām) is a cover (hijāb) for whoever is
below it, because they obtain assistance through it. Every one
among the men of spiritual distinction obtains assistance
through someone whose sphere of influence (dā’ira) is more
comprehensive in scope than his own. So the one granting
assistance becomes the cover for the one receiving assistance. All
of them receive assistance through the saintly savior-pole (al-qu╙b
al-ghawth), for he is the cover for all of them. He obtains
assistance through one of four prophets: Idrīs, Ilyās, Jesus or
Khi╓r. They in turn receive assistance through the supreme
cover, Allah’s blessing and peace upon him, who receives it from
the Absolute Presence. He supports all of his deputies (nawāb), in
both the visible and invisible worlds, according to this capacity.
In fact, he assists every individual according to that individual’s
readiness, not according to his own capacity to provide
assistance. Indeed, the Prophet is a vast overflowing ocean, with
no beginning and no end. If someone allows the eye of his heart
to look at the ocean of his effulgence (fay╓) and the wide
diffusion of his sublime assistance – observing how all existent
beings receive from him, with or without intermediaries – his
heart will be astounded and his mind bewildered. The saintly
pole (qu╙b) is in charge of sixteen worlds comprehensively, this
lower world (dunya) and the afterlife (akhira) each being one of
158 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
them. He supports all of these worlds and their inhabitants. Our
Prophet is the one who furnishes him with this complete
assistance, and who gives him the strength to bear this station
(maqām).
This venerable Imam al-╔ātimī, despite the depth of his
experience in the sciences of gnosis, was not aware of the
Hidden Presence through which the saintly Pole derives
support. He mentioned that the Pole’s support comes from the
spirituality (rūhāniyya) of the Prophets. In fact, the saintly
Savior-Pole (al-qu╙b al-ghawth) receives support (from the
Prophet) through the ocean of the greatest assistance, that of
the Hidden Pole and well-known Seal of Mu╕ammadan
Sainthood: he being our master, the means of access to our
Lord, Shaykh Sīdī A╕mad b. Mu╕ammad al-Tijānī al-╔asanī.
May Allah be pleased with him and may He benefit us by him,
Amen.
This marks the end of the chapter. With Allah is the
success on the balanced path, and to Him, Glorious is He, is
the return and final destination.
159
CHAPTER 2
Seeking the Shaykh, his Character
and the State of Discipleship
nyone who recognizes what the Divine Presence
requires of every human being, while observing the
states of human nature, will be aware of the necessity
of seeking the shaykh of spiritual guidance (murshid). In the
words of the scholar and distinguished spiritual guide, Nā╛im:
The aspirant must accompany the shaykh well versed in the
routes to Allah (masālik)
Who will protect him from the dangers of the spiritual path.
Seeing the shaykh will remind him of Allah
And he will escort the servant to his Master.
In al-Durr al-Thamīn, the scholar Badr al-Dīn Mayyāra1
explained, “As for the words, ‘keeping company with a
shaykh well versed in masālik,’ the Arabic term masālik is the

1. Badr al-Dīn al-Mayyāra, or Abū ‘Abd-Allah Mu╕ammad b. A╕mad (d.
1662) was a prominent teacher of ╔adīth and Maliki jurisprudence in Fes,
Morocco. The work mentioned here was primarily a theological tract, the
full title being, al-Durr al-Thamin wa al-Mawrid al-Ma’in fi Sharh al-Murshid alMu’in ‘ala al-Daruri min ‘Ulum al-Din.
A
160 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
plural of maslak, the noun of place corresponding to the verbal
noun, sulūk (traveling, seeking, or conduct). It thus signifies
the path (╙arīq) which arrives to Allah the Exalted.”
In his commentary on the saying of the gnostic, Sīdī Ibn
‘A╙ā Allah, “But for the battlegrounds of souls, the journey of
the travelers could not be realized,” Shaykh Mu╕ammad Ibn
‘Abbād (al-Rundi) had this to say:
On this path, the aspirant (murīd) cannot dispense with the
companionship of a shaykh who is genuine spiritual guide, one
who has completed his own training and rid himself of vain
desires. The seeker must submit himself to him, persist in
obedience to him, and comply with everything he instructs him
to do, without deliberation, interpretation or hesitation. As has
been said: “If someone does not have a shaykh, Satan will
become his shaykh.”2
Indeed, Abū Ya’lī al-Thaqafī3 states that even if a man
acquired all the sciences and kept company with all classes of
people, he could not match the attainment of the men of
distinction, except by means of spiritual training received from
a shaykh, imam or educator of sound advice. If a person does
not receive his education from someone who gives him
commands and prohibitions, showing him the faults of his
actions and his personal stupidities, his training will not result
in attainment to the stations of spiritual progress (maqāmāt).
Thus Sīdī Abū Madyan said, “If someone does not receive his
training from those who are well trained, him whom he

2. This last statement is traced to Abū Yazid al-Bastami (d. 874, Persia). See
Section I, Chapter I, where a slightly different version is quoted from alBastami: “Whoever does not have a teacher (ustadh), his imam is Satan.”
3. Likely Abū ‘Alī al-Thaqafi (d. 940), a famous Sufi and jurist from
Nishapur, Persia. Al-Thaqafi was the leading shaykh of the “Malamatiyya”,
and was the teacher of al-Su’luki, who taught al-Sulami, who taught alQushayri.
Seeking the Shaykh, his Character And the State of Discipleship 161
follows is even more corrupt than the follower.” The author of
La╙ā’if al-Minan4 has said:
The only guidance to follow is that of a saint to whom Allah has
directed you, and has revealed to you the special quality with
which He has endowed him, so the presence of his human
nature has disappeared from you in the discovery of this special
quality. You will therefore give him free rein, for he will
transport you on the path of right guidance. He will make you
aware of the frivolities of your lower self, in its hidden depths
and its secret caverns. He will guide you to the total
concentration on Allah, and teach you to flee from everything
apart from Him. He will travel beside you on your road until
you arrive in the presence of Allah. He will acquaint you with
your personal misconduct and make you aware of Allah’s mercy
toward you. The recognition of your personal misconduct will
help you to escape from it, and cease to justify it in the reliance
on your own means. The knowledge of Allah’s mercy toward
you will help you approach Him, to offer thanks to Him, and to
remain in His presence at all times.
Perhaps you will ask, “Where is there anyone who fits such
a description? You have spoken of a person more astonishing
than a marvelous mythological bird (‘anqā’)!” But the knowledge
of where such guides are to be found is not necessary for you to
know. All that you need is the sincerity in seeking them. If you
are utterly sincere, you will surely discover a spiritual guide. As
Allah has said in two verses of the Qur’ān, “Is it not He who
answers the needy when they call unto Him?” (27:62), and, “For
if they had been sincerely truthful with Allah, it would be better
for them” (47:21). So if you are in dire need of someone who will
lead you toward Allah, like a thirsty person in dire need of water
or a frightened person in dire need of protection, you will find
your goal closer even than your having to ask. If you are in dire

4. This is the work of al-Sha’rānī, the full title of which is: La╙ā’if al-Minan wa
al-Akhlāq.
162 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
need of Allah, like the mother in need of her lost child, you will
find the Real near to you and ready to answer you. You will find
the arrival in the Divine Presence easy for you, and the
encounter with the Real will be facilitated for you.
The author, may Allah have mercy on him, also speaks of
the shaykh as one of Allah’s gracious favors and gifts to the
aspirant. But this is provided the aspirant is sincere in his
quest, and exerts himself to the full extent of his ability in the
effort to follow his master’s advice rather than the illusory
whims of those without knowledge. At this point (of
sincerity), Allah will establish him with the proper conduct in
dealing with his shaykh, who will then guide him toward the
loftiest degrees and the highest levels of attainment.
According to Sīdī Abū Madyan:
The shaykh is someone whom your essence (dhāt) has
acknowledged with preference, and whom your innermost being
(sirr) has acknowledged with reverence. The shaykh refines you
with his exemplary character, trains (addaba) you by bowing his
head in silence, and illuminates your inner being with his
radiance. The shaykh is him who gathers you in his presence
and preserves you in his absence.
According to the La╙ā’if al-Minan:
Your shaykh is not someone from whom you hear; your shaykh
is someone from whom you receive. Your shaykh is not someone
whose expressions confront you; your shaykh is the one whose
signals become secreted within you. Your shaykh is not he who
summons you to the door; but he who removes the veil between
himself and you. Your shaykh is not the one whose words
challenge you; he is the one whose spiritual state uplifts you.
Your shaykh is the one who releases you from the prison of
your vain desires, and brings you into the presence of the Lord.
Your shaykh is one who never ceases to polish the mirror of
Seeking the Shaykh, his Character And the State of Discipleship 163
your heart, until the lights of your Lord become manifest
therein. He will encourage you toward Allah so that you will set
off toward Him, and he will be with you until you arrive in His
Presence. He will not cease to be by your side until he has cast
you between His hands, and thrust you into the light of the
Divine Presence. Then he will say to you, “Here you are and
here is your Lord.”
As for the rules of proper conduct for the shaykh in
relation to the disciple and for the disciple in relation to the
shaykh, they are frequently discussed in the books of the Sufi
masters. One of the most eloquent and succinct account is that
provided by Imam Abū al-Qāsim al-Qushayri:
The stipulation incumbent on the disciple is that he must not
breathe a breath without his shaykh’s permission. If someone
disagrees with his shaykh, even concerning the drawing of a
breath, either in private or public, he must quickly recognize his
error. Concealed disagreement with the shaykhs is more serious
than public disagreement, because the former amounts to
treachery. If someone contradicts his shaykh, he will not smell
the fragrant aroma of truthfulness. If someone is guilty of
anything of the kind, he must make haste to apologize and seek
pardon for the contradiction and treachery he has committed,
and his shaykh will direct him toward the means of atonement
for his offense.
If the disciple returns to his shaykh with sincere remorse, it
is incumbent on his shaykh to make up for his disciple’s
shortcomings with his own magnetic spiritual energy (himma).
Since the aspirants are manifestly dependent on their shaykhs, it
is obligatory (far╓) on the shaykhs to spend of the power of their
spiritual states to make up for the shortcomings of the disciples.
The definitive statement on this subject is the response of
our Shaykh, the hidden pole and well-known isthmus (Shaykh
164 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
A╕mad al-Tijānī), as has been recorded in the Jawāhir alMa’ānī:
As for the question about seeking the shaykh (Shaykh A╕mad
Tijānī was asked): Is it strictly incumbent on every single
individual, or on some but not others, and what is the reason in
either case? The Shaykh replied: The quest for the shaykh is not
a duty prescribed by the Sacred Law (sharī’a), with the inevitable
consequence of reward for its performance and punishment for
its abandonment. There is nothing of this kind in the Sacred
Law.
But it is obligatory from the standpoint of common sense,
just as the search for water is imperative for the thirsty person,
for common sense tells him he will perish if he does not find
water to satisfy his thirst. Such a perspective relates to what has
been mentioned: namely, human beings have only been created
for the worship of Allah, and the dedication to the Divine
Presence by the rejection of everything apart from Him. The
seeker has recognized his own inability to make his lower self
comply with the need to enter the Divine Presence, and has
recognized the weakness of his own self in what is required to
enter the Divine Presence, in terms of fulfilling the necessary
duties and proper modes of conduct. He has come to know he
has no refuge or safety from Allah if he should remain attached
to his lower self, following its vain passions and turning away
from Allah.
From this perspective, it is clearly necessary for him to seek
the consummate shaykh. This necessity is strictly a matter of
natural logic, not a rule derived from legal texts, since what is
mentioned in the legal texts is only the duty to fulfill the rights of
Allah, both outwardly and inwardly. This duty is obligatory on
every single individual among His servants, and no one has any
legally valid excuse for neglecting it, nor has he any excuse for
his subservience to vain passions and his inability to control his
lower self. There is nothing in the Sacred Law except the
Seeking the Shaykh, his Character And the State of Discipleship 165
incumbency thereof, and the penalty incurred by violating the
prohibition of neglecting that duty.
This is what is contained in the Sacred Law, so the shaykh
who must be sought is the shaykh who is qualified to provide
instruction, he being the one who teaches the nature of the legal
observances demanded of the servant, in terms of performance
of the commandments and avoidance of the prohibitions. Every
ignorant person must seek out the shaykh, for no one can do
without him.
There is nothing other than this from a legal perspective that
requires seeking out the shaykhs. But it is definitely obligatory
from the perspective of common sense, since the ignorant person
is comparable to an invalid. If such a person has resigned
himself to sickness, on account of his inability to cure himself by
his own means, one can only conclude that he wishes to stay
sick. On the other hand, if the patient should demand how he
may obtain perfect health, one would tell him to seek out the
expert physician. Indeed, the expert physician is familiar with
the sickness and its cause, he knows the medicine that will cure
it and knows how this medicine should be applied – how much
should be taken, in what manner, how often and under what
circumstances.
As for the distinctive characteristics of the consummate
shaykh, al-Sharīshī5 has said in his Anwār al-Sarā’ir:
The shaykh certainly has signs, for without them, the aspirant is
merely adrift in the nights of vain passions. If the shaykh bears
no distinguishing mark, either outwardly or inwardly, the
aspirant will be swallowed by the depths of the ocean, for the
sick man is in the state closest to perdition if there is no doctor
informed of his condition. The signs of the shaykh are that he is

5. The Andalusian scholar Abū al-Abbas A╕mad al-Kaysi al-Sharīshī was the
author of Shar╕ al-Maqāmat al-Harīrī, a commentary on a well-known work of
Arabic literature.
166 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
not inclined to follow vain passions. For him, the ephemeral
world (dunya) has been folded up, and the hereafter has been
spread before him.
Our Shaykh (A╕mad al-Tijānī) – our means of access to our
Lord, the hidden pole and the renowned seal of
Mu╕ammadan sainthood – has this to say in the Jawāhir alMa’ānī:
As for the true nature of the consummate shaykh, he is the one
for whom all the veils have been removed from the perfect
beholding of the Divine Presence, with visual perception and
certain realization. The process begins with attentive awareness
(mu╕ādara), which entails observing the realities from behind a
thick curtain (sitr). Next comes disclosure (mukāshafa), which
entails observing the realities from behind a thin curtain. Then
comes witnessing (mushāhada), which entails the manifestation of
the realities without a veil (hijāb), but with particularity. Last
comes the direct vision (mu’āyana), which entails observing the
realities without veil or particularity, with absolutely no
surviving trace of variation or alteration. This is the station of
eradication, absolute truth, destruction, and the annihilation of
annihilation. There is nothing in this station except the direct
vision of the Real, in the Real, for the Real and by the Real.
So nothing remains except Allah, and nothing besides Him
There is nothing to be added and nothing to be separated.
Then comes true existence, where one is able to distinguish
the degrees (marātib) on the basis of direct knowledge (ma’rifa) of
their particularities, requirements and exigencies and everything
to which they are entitled. One will know as well the source for
each degree, the reason for its existence, its intended purpose,
and the return of its affairs. This is the station of the servant’s
comprehension of his personal identity and his knowledge of all
its secrets and particularities; as well as his knowledge of the
Divine Presence, its grandeur, majesty, exalted attributes and
Seeking the Shaykh, his Character And the State of Discipleship 167
perfection. And this knowledge of his will be the product of
direct experience and indubitable vision.
Vast deserts must be traversed for the holder of such a
degree. In spite of the hardships, the effort is perfectly
worthwhile, since the Real has granted him specific
authorization to provide right guidance to His servants, and has
charged him with the task of directing them toward the Divine
Presence. This is the shaykh who deserves to be sought, for he
matches the description of “great” given in the ╔adīth reported
by Abū Juhayfa: “You must consult the scholars, mingle with the
wise, and keep company with the great.”
Whenever the aspirant comes across someone who matches
this description, it is obligatory upon him to place himself at his
disposal without any personal choice or volition, like a corpse in
the hands of its ritual washer. He must rely on the shaykh to
deliver him from the distress in which he has been immersed,
and transfer him to complete and pure serenity; and this through
the contemplation of the Divine Presence and nothing else. The
disciple must purge himself from all other options or desires for
anything besides this. Whenever the shaykh advises or
commands him to do something, he must beware of asking
questions like, “Why?” “How?” “In what manner?” “For what
purpose?” This is the cause for the shaykh’s disgust and
rejection. He must be firmly convinced that the shaykh is more
aware of his best interests than he is, and more familiar with the
means by which they can be achieved. He must therefore go
along with him in everything, for the shaykh will only act for the
sake of Allah and with Allah’s help, in order to extract him from
the darkness and lust of his lower self.
As for the shaykh who matches this description, how can he
be contacted and how can he be recognized? The answer is that
such shaykhs are many, and most of them are in the major cities
where they have taken up residence. But as for recognizing them
and contacting them, this is a difficult problem, obscure like red
168 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
sulfur (kabrīt al-a╕mar), since they have blended with the styles
and customs of the common people. If someone should question
them about this state of affairs, they will shun him and chase
him away, swearing to him they are in no way connected to the
subject.
They have a compelling reason for this, because the regular
order of existence has been disrupted by the Will of the Real,
something no one can deny. Now, the only concern for every
individual is the pursuit of his selfish interests and carnal
desires, in total disregard of the Divine Presence, and of the
duties and proprieties he ought to fulfill. For the common folk at
the present time, the pursuit of the saints is motivated only by
their desire to achieve wayward objectives, such as the
enjoyment of the world’s pleasures and lusts, protection from
calamities and comfort in this abode. They are content to leave
alone their stubborn addiction to terribly dangerous causes of
perdition, like committing abominable major sins whose
punishment is damnation in the Hellfire. In this state, they have
no exit from their prison, and no way to return to the Divine
Presence.
When the knowledgeable people of Allah became aware of
the extent to which this applied to the common people, they
concealed themselves from ordinary folk, and kept away from
them with every means and in every situation. So they began to
live in the deserts and wastelands, but then the Real required of
them to live again among the common people, due to matters
with which the Real obliged them by His decree, and no one can
dispute with Him concerning His decree. Since they could no
longer find any justification for avoiding the common people by
escaping to the deserted areas, nor could they determine how to
correct them and bring them back into the Divine Presence, they
became like one who lives in a society of ignorant fools. They
pelt him with stones, but he is compelled to endure with
patience and reside in their midst. This being the trap in which
Seeking the Shaykh, his Character And the State of Discipleship 169
they found themselves, the saints concealed themselves from the
common people, and kept them at bay in very possible way.
The common folk sometimes happen to smell the fragrant
perfumes of the saints wafting from behind the veils and
apparently joining them in their vain pursuits. Because of this,
the gnostics use various pretenses designed to confuse them. To
keep their real identity hidden from the common folk, they
pretended to be involved in abominations such as adultery,
fornication, obscene lying, drinking alcohol or suicide, which
condemn their perpetrator to Allah’s displeasure and wrath.6
There was absolutely no substance to these antics of the gnostics:
they appeared to be violating the Sacred Law, but in reality were
only thereby concealing themselves from the common folk, in
order to conceal their spiritual station and to permit their good
conduct free rein.
If you have understood this well, you will realize that the
truthful and the liars are mingled together in the public arena, so
the former cannot be distinguished from latter, and it is quite
impossible to recognize the consummate gnostic, except in
extremely rare cases. However, the possibility does exist,
because some of the gnostics have manifested themselves in
visible forms which are perfectly consistent with the Sacred Law.
Suppose that someone should manifest himself in such a form,
laying claim to being a shaykh on the strength of his being
known to guide people toward Allah, for his abstinence from
and lack of interest in this world and its people, together with
evidence of the success achieved by other people with his help. If

6. Shaykh A╕mad Tijānī is here of course referring to the Malamatiyya, or
those who call blame on themselves by pretending to commit reprehensible
behavior or be otherwise ordinary men. The earliest recorded mention of the
term is from Abd al-Rahman al-Sulami al-Naysaburi (d. 1021), in his Risalat
al-Malamatiyya. For more on the subject, see Kenneth Honnerkamp
(introduction and translation), “Stations of the Righteous and The Stumbling
of those Aspiring: Two Texts from the Path of Blame”, in Three Early Sufi
Texts (Fons Vitae: Louisville, KY, 2003).
170 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
it is clear to aspirant the person in question matches such a
description, he must commit himself to him at the very moment
of their encounter. What is normally required of the aspirant,
however, is that he should refrain from committing himself until
he has studied the transmission of reports about him from
reliable sources and people closely acquainted with him. Then, if
he clearly matches the above description, the aspirant should
commit himself to him, but otherwise not.
He who wants to connect himself with a shaykh in the
present age, but finds it difficult to recognize him – afraid of
being ensnared by the liars – he must devote his attention to
Allah with absolute sincerity. He must turn to Him with a
steadfast heart and humbly entreat Him to reveal the
consummate shaykh capable of delivering the disciple from his
affliction. He must beg Allah to guide him towards his shaykh,
to enable him to comply with his command, and to let him
plunge into depths of the shaykh’s ocean. This should be done
with the knowledge that there is no other means at his disposal
(for delivering him from affliction).
More importantly, he who is unable to discover the perfect
shaykh should devote every available moment to invoking
blessings on the Prophet (╗alāt ‘ala al-Nabiyy), may Allah bless
him and grant him peace. This is the most appropriate,
beneficial, speedy and elevated way to reach the desired goal.
The prayer on the Prophet must be performed with perfect
manners, presence of mind, and the heartfelt conviction that one
is sitting in front of him !, and this must be done persistently. If
a person persists in this, yearning for Allah like the thirsty man
yearning for water, Allah will take him by the hand and draw
him close. Allah will entrust him with a perfect shaykh to be
guided by the hand. Or Allah may entrust him directly to His
Prophet to be trained. Or Allah may simply remove his obstacles
and open for him the door of arrival. And all this is the result of
the servant’s dedication to invoking blessings on Allah’s beloved
Seeking the Shaykh, his Character And the State of Discipleship 171
!. Offering blessings on the Prophet is the most effective of all
means of access to Allah: no one who has practiced it with
constancy has ever been disappointed in the quest for Allah.
As for the question about choosing the shaykh, and
weighing his actions and spiritual states, it is not proper. No one
who has engaged in that has ever achieved success, for this
closes the doors to Allah. If a person is bent on this, he applies it
to all his fellow creatures and Allah will show him deficiency in
every creature, so he will not feel comfortable with anyone.
Trusting the shaykh is a Divine command which Allah has
placed in the hearts, so the shaykh’s companion cannot detach
himself from him, even if he considers him guilty of a thousand
sins. If the aspirant is sincere, however, the reward for his
sincerity is that he will see nothing in his shaykh except that
which puts his heart at ease, for he will encounter none but the
truthful shaykh. As for the aspirant whose heart is not clean, he
will see only that which he finds repugnant and inadequate,
causing him to run away and take flight.
Shaykh Sīdī Mukhtār al-Kuntī said:
There is no rational explanation for (the insight contained in) the
shaykh’s verbal expressions. The shaykh’s statements and
actions are based on Divine faculties of wisdom. This is the
meaning of the Sufi saying, “If someone does not understand
our spiritual states, he cannot understand our verbal
statements.” Even if the shaykh should command you to do
something in which you expect disaster, you must plunge
headlong into it. Success will be found in it. Essential meanings
are manifested to the shaykhs in forms peculiar to a particular
individual.
Should your shaykh put you to the test, stand firm beneath
the scourge of his trial. He will then deliver you from the prison
of tribulation. Then the burden of such trials will become light
with your knowledge that the tests (mi╕an) of the shaykhs are
172 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
actually acts of kindness (mina╕). Remember the case of Abū
Lubāba,7 for his is a perfect example of proper behavior (adab).
You are the shaykh’s brother, and he is the inheritor. Allah is
the liberator, and the goal is one. Beware of impatient haste. This
(submission to the shaykh’s command) presents a difficult
challenge, since it marks the end of the life you have known and
deprives you of illusionary hopes. The shaykh only tests you to
draw you near. He only draws you near is to make you humble.
He only makes you humble to shake you up. He only shakes you
up to plant you. He only plants you to make you blossom. He
only makes you blossom to make you bear fruit. He only makes
you bear fruit to make you thrive. He only makes you thrive is
so that you can repent. He only causes you to repent so that you
become his deputy in withholding and giving, in hardship and
comfort.
Beware of walking beside him with shoes on your feet, or
while wearing any signs of luxury, unless he permits you to do
so because of a valid excuse. You must not sleep in a house in
which he is sleeping, nor spit in his presence, nor blow your
nose, nor stretch your legs, nor show a great deal of curiosity,
nor sit on his carpet. You may handle his clothes for the sake of
blessing, for the masters used avail themselves of their shaykh’s
garments for that purpose. This was likewise the habit of the
companions of the Messenger ! in respect to his clothing, his
hair, his cleansing agents, the remnants of his ablutions, his
blessed saliva, his perspiration, his riding animal, his drinking
vessel, the sites of his ritual prayer and his private seclusion.
They witnessed their effectiveness in the prevention of physical
ailments and spiritual evils. Surely you are aware of the time

7. Abū Lubāba b. ‘Abd al-Mundhir was a companion of the Prophet who,
after realizing he had betrayed the Prophet during the siege of the Banu
Qurayza in Medina, tied himself in the mosque for six days until Allah sent
revelation to forgive him, “And others have admitted their sins, those who
have mixed a righteous deed with an evil one. Perhaps Allah will turn to
them in mercy. He is Forgiving, Merciful” (Qur’ān, 9:102).
Seeking the Shaykh, his Character And the State of Discipleship 173
Khālid b. Walīd returned to the fray of battle only to rescue a
turban he had lost which contained some hair of the Prophet.
When he was told that a large number of Muslims had died
because of his rejoining the battle, he said, “I did not return for
the sake of the turban itself, but only to keep the hair of Allah’s
Messenger from falling into the hands of the polytheists, and so
dispossess them of its blessing (baraka).” The way the Sufis wear
the tattered gown (khirqa) is another example.8 This is worn
when they recognize a certain perfection in themselves, for it
represents the flag of the army’s commander.
Habits worth cultivating include respect for everything
connected with the shaykh, even a dog, and affection for his
disciples, his kinsfolk, his friends, and all his favorite things,
even including types of food and clothing. Every form of
reverence and respect for the shaykh is actually for Allah. The
Messenger once said, “You must venerate the shaykhs, for the
veneration paid to them is part of the reverence due to Allah.”9
He also said, “Commensurate with the reverence will be the
blessing.” The disciple must therefore emulate the righteous
early believers (salaf) in their respect for the shaykhs, both
outwardly and inwardly. He must also call to mind the intention
(of his commitment), in a state (of reverence) received and
learned from his shaykh. For his shaykh receives and learns
from none but Allah and His Messenger, since he is the inheritor
and deputy of the Messenger.

8. The shaykh’s bestowal of the khirqah, sometimes referred to as the “Sufi
cloak,” on his disciple indicates a symbolic recognition of his spiritual
attainment, though in some cases is bestowed simply to benefit the disciple
in his spiritual progress. Al-Hujwiri claims the wearing of the Khirqa is
Sunnah, quoting a ╔adīth, “See that you wear woolen clothing so that you
might find the sweetness of faith.” For more information see Jamal Elias,
“The Sufi Robe (Khirqa) as a Vehicle of Spiritual Authority,” in Gordon (ed.),
Robes and Honor: The Medieval World of Investiture (Palgrave, 2001).
9. Reported by Ibn ‘Adi in al-Kāmil fi Du’afā’ al-Rijāl; also cited by al-Daylami
in al-Firdaws.
174 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Allah says, “If an idolater seeks your protection, then protect
him so he may hear the word of Allah” (Qur’ān, 9:6). And He
says, “Nor does he (the Prophet) speak from his own desire”
(53:3). All this is to dismiss the illusionary allegories (concerning
the shaykh), and to set firm the decree of Divine Reality (╕ukm al-
╕aqīqa). The Prophet ! said: “You must say, ‘Our Lord, to You
belongs the praise!’ Allah will respond on the tongue of His
Prophet, ‘Allah listens to those who praise Him!’”10
The shaykh is he who polishes you with his virtuous
character traits, trains you by bowing his head in silence, and
enlightens your inner being with his radiance. Zarrūq listed four
things that must be included in the disciple’s conduct:
compliance with the prescriptions, abstinence from opposition,
constant perseverance and earnest pursuit of the goals. How
beautifully put! You should also know that four things are
bound to come to the disciple in the beginning: hurtfulness and
honorable reception, and offenses and good deeds. So respond to
the hurtfulness with patience, and to the honorable reception
with appreciation, without transgressing the limits of the Sacred
Law in going to excess or falling short. Respond to the offenses
with exoneration, without disputation or contempt; and to the
good deeds with unhesitating approval. The spiritual health of
the shaykh is damaged by the plague of conceit and
pretentiousness, the roots of (the disciple’s) aversion and protest.
The remedy is repudiation (of the ego-self) and surrender.
The conditions of being a shaykh are genuine knowledge
(‘ilm), unambiguous spiritual experience (dhawq), lofty aspiration
(himma), being in a state of Divine satisfaction (╕āla ma╓diyya),
and possessing penetrating spiritual insight (ba╗īra).

10. These two formulaic statements are repeated in the ritual prayer when
coming up bowing. The citations in this paragraph are meant to remind the
reader of Allah’s proximity to the purified human being, most especially the
Prophet and his inheritors, the shaykhs.
Seeking the Shaykh, his Character And the State of Discipleship 175
The secret of this all resides in the disciple’s sincerity (╗idq),
for this is his real shaykh.
After some further discussion, Shaykh Mukhtār said:
Know, dear brother, that the proof of Allah’s wanting you to
arrive (wu╗ūl) to Him, and to commune (itti╗āl) with Him, is your
connection with the shaykh capable of spiritual training. He
allows no one to reach the shaykhs, unless He wishes him to
reach Himself. This means that no one can reach Him, except
someone who connects himself with the shaykhs; and no one is
veiled from the shaykhs except he who has become veiled by
them. Allah the Exalted said, “Such was Allah’s custom for those
who passed away of old, and you will not find any change in
Allah’s custom” (33:62).
Tāj al-Dīn Ibn ‘A╙ā’ Allah said in this regard, “Glory to
Him who did not entrust His saints with guiding others,
except for the purpose of guiding to Himself.”
The one who understands what has been set forth above
will surely comprehend the necessity of seeking the shaykh
capable of spiritual training. As for the disciple’s proper
conduct in his company, this subject has been addressed by
the words of the venerable shaykhs we have transmitted here.
And know that the golden words of the perfected ones are not
of trifling value!
As previously explained,11 a true believer cannot profess
the cessation of the Prophet’s assistance, and the saints are the
inheritors of the prophets. Thus, the spiritual training
conveyed from Allah to His creatures will never be

11. See the end of the Kāshif’s introduction, where Shaykh A╕mad Tijānī is
quoted, “If anyone imagines that all of the Prophet’s support for his
community came to an end with his death, he is ignorant of the Prophet’s
degree, and guilty of treating him indecently. If he does not repent of this
deluded conviction, he is guilty of dying as an unbeliever.”
176 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
discontinued. In the first epoch, He used to send the prophets
with training and guidance. Whenever an intermission (fatra)
occurred, He would end it by sending a Prophet, until He
sealed the mission of prophecy by sending the Seal of the
Prophets and the Imam of Envoys, our master Mu╕ammad !.
He then began to dispatch the gnostics, endowing them with
special authorization to provide spiritual training. Whenever
an intermission occurred, He would end it by dispatching a
consummate saint as a spiritual guide. There are thus two
kinds of intermission: that in the age of unbelief, which was
abolished by sending a Prophet; and that in the age of Islam,
which is abolished by dispatching a shaykh of spiritual
training. Such is indicated by the ╔adīths: “The religious
scholars of my community are like the Prophets of the children
of Israel”, and “Allah will dispatch a renovator (mujaddid).”12
According to one traditional report, when the Prophet
Mu╕ammad ! died, the earth wept and said, “My God and
Master! I am left here with no prophet to walk on my surface
until the Day of Resurrection.” Allah then informed the earth,
“I shall set upon your surface members of this Mu╕ammadan
community whose hearts are attached to the hearts of the
Prophets, and I shall not deprive you of them until the Day of
Resurrection.” May Allah include us among the greatest and
most exalted of them, in the station facing the flower of His
creation !.
This ends the chapter. With Allah is the success on the
straight path, and to Him the Glorious is the return and final
destination.

12. The full ╔adīth, on the authority of Abū Hurayra and contained in the
Sunan of Abū Dāwūd and al-Tirmidhī, is as follows: “Allah will send to this
community at the advent of every century one who will renovate its religion
for it.”
177
CHAPTER 3
The Vision of Allah
With Allah is the success for what I say, and He is the
Guide by His Grace to the straight path.
now that the Sufi people speak with their own
technical vocabulary, not limited to the external
meaning of words. Nobody understands them except
those who have drunk from what they have drunk. They
might be criticized by those blind of sight, deprived of the
light of belief (ta╗dīq) and thus unable to confirm what the Sufi
people claim. The critic also may base his criticism on
untenable arguments. He has not experienced the thing he is
criticizing in order to know how to refute it.
If the critic hears someone claiming to have had the vision
(mushāhada) of the Real, he will cite the verse, “The eyes do not
perceive Him” (Qur’ān, 6:103). But the one seeing does not lay
claim to ocular perception. He does not notice the eyes (ab╗ār),
or anything else. The one who sees anything else besides Him
who is seen (mashhūd), and is convinced of its existence, even a
speck of dust, has associated a partner with Allah. Of all
K
178 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
people, the one laying claim to the vision of Allah is
completely convinced of Allah’s statement, “The eyes do not
perceive Him, but He perceives the eyes” (6:103).1
The one denying (the vision of Allah) also might try to
prove his argument by citing the verse of the Qur’ān:
When Moses came to the place appointed by Us, and his Lord
had spoken to him, he said, “My Lord, show (Yourself) to me,
that I may look at You!” He said, “You will not see Me, but look
at the mountain – if it stays still in its place, then you will see
Me.” When his Lord manifested Himself to the mountain, He
made it crumble to dust. And Moses fell down in a swoon. When
he recovered consciousness, he said, “Glory to You! To You I
turn in repentance, and I am the first of the believers” (7:143).
You should understand, however, that there is no
incongruity between His saying, “You will not see Me,” and
His saying, “Then you will see Me.”
Know that when a servant comes near to Allah through
supererogatory good works, Allah enraptures (yajdhabu) him,
loving him with a forceful attraction (jadhban). In this
(rapture), the servant is not aware of himself, or anything else;
neither what came before nor what will come after, neither of
any part of himself, nor the whole of himself. He becomes
absent from his personal witnessing (shuhūd), and is consumed
in the intensity of His Master’s summoning, Glorious and
Exalted is He. In this state, he witnesses the Divine Presence
(╕a╓ra), as before the world and after the Hereafter, as before
the before and after the after. This Presence has no beginning
and no end, no above and no below, no right and no left, no
explanation (kayf) and no definition, no name and no attribute,

1. This verse can be translated in a variety of ways. A popular alternative
(Pickthal and others) reads, “Vision comprehends Him not, but He
comprehends all vision.”
The Vision of Allah 179
no going forward and no going back, no connection and no
separation, no going in and no going out, no sensation and no
realization (idrāk), no incarnation (╕ulūl) and no fusion
(itti╕ād). The lover becomes extinct in his Beloved. And he
becomes extinct to his own extinction (fanā’). Nothing remains
except the Divine Selfhood (al-Huwiyya).
Words may emerge from the one entrusted with this
(state) which those with no spiritual experience consider
preposterous claims. Nonetheless, his conduct in this is perfect
in the sight of Allah. In this regard, Abū Madyan al-Ghawth
said:
Do not blame the drunkard in his state of intoxication
Our intoxication has relieved us of the burden of formality.
The one entrusted with this spiritual position (maqām) is
not claiming something deceitful, he only has realized the
desire of the Real, Glorious and Exalted is He. There are no
words and no means of expression for the vision (ru’ya)
claimed by those of spiritual distinction, for here all
explanation comes to an end. Certain verses of the Qur’ān and
sayings of the Prophet ! provide evidence of this, and these
will be presented in due course. If we assume for the sake of
argument that they indeed are claiming the (ocular) vision of
Allah, they are not claiming it in this world or the next. In this
way, the vision of Allah is among the acceptable possibilities,
according to the venerable scholars following the doctrine of
the Sunnah. Their opinions in this regard will be presented
shortly. For now, let me say simply that Allah’s statement,
“The eyes do not perceive Him,” is a generalization that
permits a particularization (takh╗ī╗). Since the miracle (karāma)
of the saint particularizes the definitive sciences, how could it
not be the same for a theoretical generalization? Once this has
180 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
been established, we will present what the scholars have said,
beginning with the jurists and moving on to the Sufi imams.
The erudite scholar Badr al-Dīn Mayyāra said in his
commentary on Ibn ‘Āshir:2
The creation’s vision of our Lord, Glorious and Exalted is He, is
among the legitimate possibilities according to the people of
truth (ahl al-╕aqq). Since He exists – and it is permissible for every
existent being to be seen with the faculty of vision – He can also
be seen, but in a manner that befits Him, Blessed and Exalted is
He; without spatiality, physicality or relativity.
Some try to force the issue, as if issuing summons to see and
encounter Him, forgetting that the authority belongs to Him.
Unsatisfied with the middle course, they fluctuate between
extreme proximity and extreme distance. They should know that
He is the One Who comes at speed, and there is no incumbency
on Him to be seen, since He has already accepted nonappearance.
It has been accepted as permissible to know (ya’lamu) our
Lord, Glorious and Exalted is He, in a manner befitting His
Majesty, without delimitation. In a similar way, it is permissible
to see Him, Glorious and Exalted is He, with the vision (ba╗ar), in
a manner befitting his Exaltedness. It is impossible for this vision
of Him to be tainted with confusion or distraction, because of the
impossibility of any confusion being connected with Him. If the
seer would associate the vision (ru’ya) of Him with any
confusion whatsoever, the seer would not be permitted even a
glance. For how could confusion be associated with Him, when
in one glance He unveils Himself to the seer with the infinite
manifestations of His Essence, without restriction or
delimitation. If it were otherwise, He would not be

2. This is the same text by Mayyāra (d. 1662, Fes) mentioned earlier,
Mukhta╗ar al-Durr, which is a commentary on al-Murshid al-Mu’īn by Ibn
‘Āshir (d. 1631, Fes).
The Vision of Allah 181
distinguishable from the other things to which confusion is
attached.
As recorded in al-Shanawwānī’s commentary on the
Mukhta╗ar of al-Bukhārī,3 al-Laqānī4 said in one poem:
He can indeed be seen with the eyes (ab╗ār)
But without any explanation (kayf) or limitation
And in al-Idā’at,5 the author said:
The vision of Allah with the eyes (ab╗ār)
Is possible according to the people who can see (ahl al-istab╗ār)
Sīdī A╕mad al-╖āwī, the shaykh, the imam of exemplary
aspiration, said in his ╔āshiyya ‘ala al-Jalālayn in reference to
the verse, “The eyes do not perceive Him” (6:103):
Al-Jalāl said, “That is to say, ‘You do not see Him.’ This (denial)
applies in particular (circumstances) since (it is accepted) that the
believers will see Him in the Hereafter, as indicated by His
words, ‘On that day faces will be radiant, gazing upon their
Lord’ (75:22-23). There is also the Prophetic tradition of the two
Shaykhs (Bukhārī and Muslim): ‘Verily you shall see your Lord,
as clearly as you see the full moon at night.’”
It is said that the word “eyes” or “vision” (ab╗ār) in the verse,
“The eyes (ab╗ār) do not perceive Him,” is the plural of ba╗ar and
thus refers to the sense of sight, the ability to see; meaning,
applying to the physical eye itself. Here the verse retains its

3. The ╔āshiya al-Shanawwānī ‘ala Mukhtasar Ibn Abi Jamra li al-Bukhārī is the
commentary of Azhar University Rector Mu╕ammad b. ‘Alī al-Shanawani
(d. 1818) on the Ibn Abi Jamra’s abridgment of Bukhārī’s ╔adīth collection.
4. Ibrāhīm al-Laqānī (d. 1631) was a famous theologian of the ‘Ashari school
who authored the Jawharat al-Taw╕īd.
5. The Idā’at al-Dujannat fi ‘aqā’id ahl al-sunna is a versified theological tract
by Shihāb al-Dīn A╕mad al-Maqarrī (d. 1632, Tlemcen, Algeria). Al-Maqarrī
was a prominent scholar of ╔adīth, jurisprudence, theology and history. He
served as one time imam and mufti of the Qarawiyyin mosque/university in
Fes before traveling to lecture Cairo and Damascus, the latter city in which
he is buried.
182 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
general applicability in the sense that the physical eye cannot see
Him, neither is this world nor the Hereafter. This does not
contradict the ability of the believers to see Him in the Hereafter,
for this vision is without any means (kayf) or delimitation. The
possibility of seeing Allah is confirmed by both traditional
proofs, based on the Qur’ān and the Sunnah, and rational proofs.
This latter includes the fact that Allah (when Moses asked to see
Him on the mountain) made the vision of Him dependent on the
stability of the mountain; and what is dependent on the possible
is possible. Another rational proof is the fact that Moses would
not have asked for the vision of Allah if it were impossible. It is
unthinkable for a Prophet to ask for the impossible, since doing
so would be a form of pagan ignorance (jahl), and a Prophet
cannot conceivably be guilty of pagan ignorance. Another
rational proof is the fact that Allah is said to be an existent entity
(mawjūd), and it is permissible for an existent entity to be seen.
So it is permissible to say Allah can be seen, contrary to the
doctrines of the Mu’tazilites,6 Murji’ites7 or Kharajites,8 who say
that the vision of Allah is impossible.
The argument of those who reject the vision of Allah is based
on a superficial understanding of the verse of the Qur’ān quoted
above. They assert that the vision (ru’ya) entails physical contact
between the beams of the beholder’s eye and object seen. Thus
for them the object must necessarily be a physical body, and of
course Allah is exalted beyond physicality. This argument is
refuted by what we have presented earlier. Moreover, the
necessary connection (between eye and physical object) is only

6. The Mu’tazilites originated in eighth century and strove to reconcile
Islamic doctrines with the Hellenistic framework of reason.
7. The Murji’ites was an early theological school emerging soon after the
passing of the Prophet who believed, among other things, that no Muslim
would enter Hellfire.
8. The Kharijites, or khawārij, get their name from “going out” of the
community by rejecting the authority of ‘Alī b. Abi Talib, and any later
Imam who they believed went against the commandment of Allah. They
were responsible for the assassination of ‘Alī.
The Vision of Allah 183
the usual method, and not entirely logical. So it is permissible to
absent oneself from the usual.
After some more discussion of this subject, Imam al-╖āwī
went on to say, “As for the vision (ru’ya) of Him the hearts of
the gnostic sages (‘ārifīn) are experiencing in this world –
meaning the heart’s witnessing of Him in everything – it is
permissible. Indeed, it is their quest, their goal, their purpose,
their yearning.” He also recited the poetic verses:
Grant us the vision of You, (to include us) among Your beloved
ones
The vision to which are rushing the hearts of the saints.
And he went on to say: “This also applies to the vision of
Him experienced in a dream.” Shaykh Sīdī al-Mukhtār alKuntī said in al-Kawākib:
The Prophets and the saints see Allah before everything, the
righteous see Allah in everything, and the believers see Allah
after everything. That is why Ibn ‘A╙ā-Allah said, “If someone
looks at the existent phenomena, but does not see Allah before
them or after them, the presence of the lights has eluded him.
Those to whom He appears before every existent being, they are
the ones who learn from Him about His creation. Those to whom
He appears in every visible object, they are the ones who
annihilate all existing things in the experience of witnessing
Him. Those to whom He appears after the sight of His creation,
they are the ones who learn about Him through the effects of His
Power and the perfection of His attributes.” Imam al-Rāzī said:
“The manifest (╛āhir) and the hidden (bā╙in) are two names that
have been joined together, and it is not correct to separate them
except when applied to Allah the Most High. He is the Manifest
with regard to His Presence (wujūd) and Majesty (majd). He is the
Hidden by virtue of the negation of definition and explanation.
The Prophet ! indicated this in the best possible way when he
184 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
said: “You are the Manifest, and nothing can obscure You; and
You are the Hidden, and nothing can unveil You.”9
According to Imam al-Qushayri’s Risāla,
Suppose someone asks if it is possible to experience the vision
(ru’ya) of Allah with the eyes (ab╗ār), today in this world, by
virtue of the saintly miracle (karāma). The honest answer is that
there is no general consensus on this matter. I once heard Imam
Abū b. Fawrak10 relating that Abū al-Hasan al-Ash’ari stated two
opinions on the subject in Kitāb al-Ru’ya al-Kabīr.
I might add here that the Prophet ! certainly saw Him on
the Night of Ascension (al-isrā’). What is possible to be a
miracle (mu’jiza) for the Prophet is also possible to be a miracle
(karāma) for a saint. There is hardly any difference between
Prophetic and saintly miracles, according to the opinion
accepted as correct. The erudite Imam, Shaykh Mu╕ammad alYadālī, said in his Shar╕ Khātimat al-Ta╗awwuf:
Anything that has been a miracle (mu’jiza) for a Prophet can also
be a miracle (karāma) for a saint, for there is hardly any
difference between the two types (of miracles). This is the correct
opinion, and the doctrine of the majority, preferred by alGhazāli, al-Fakhr (al-Dīn) al-Razi, al-Bay╓āwi, al-Nasafī, al-╘ūsī,
Imam al-Haramayn (al-Juwayni), Ibn al-╖alā╕, Ibn Fawrak, al-
╘abarī, Abū Na╗r al-Qushayrī, al-‘Irāqī, al-Yāfi’ī, al-Zarkashī and
Ibn Jamā’a.11 One of their proofs is the Prophetic tradition:

9. ╔adīth reported in Muslim, Ibn Mājah, Abū Dāwūd, al-Tirmidhī and the
Musnad of A╕mad b. Hanbal. A literal translation of this ╔adīth would read:
“You are the Manifest, and nothing is above You; and You are the Hidden,
and nothing is below You.” This was among the favorite supplications of
Shaykh Ibrāhīm Niasse, included after the daily congregational wa╛īfa.
10. Ibn Fawrak was among the teachers of al-Qushayri. He was known as
the “second Shāfi’ī” for his excellence in jurisprudence. He was also a
famous early theologian of the Ash’ari school.
11. The mention of these scholars together, all prominent theologians
(among other things) is meant to indicate that this opinion was agreed upon
by the greatest Muslim theologians.
The Vision of Allah 185
“There is many a dusty and disheveled person who, if he
entreats Allah, Allah will answer his prayer.”12 The answering of
the prayer is universal for any such petitioner, even including
the revival of the dead and similar things.
In Ikmāl al-Ikmāl, the most competent scholar al-Ubayy13
cites the words of al-Qarāfī14 in response to the question, “If
the saint’s report of a miracle (karāma) is accepted as an extraordinary phenomenon in regards to the categorical sciences,
what about its appropriation by the general public who are
acquainted with nothing but conjecture?”
He said, “If it (the miracle) is claimed by somebody unworthy,
like a disobedient or negligent person, he certainly is a liar.” In
al-Furūq,
15 he said, “The vision of Allah the Most High while
sleeping, in a manner befitting Him, is possible in this world as
in the Hereafter. But if an unworthy person, disobedient or
negligent, claims this experience, he is to be accused of lying. If
one of the recognized saints claims it, we believe him and
acknowledge his spiritual state. There are various interpretations
of Allah’s saying, ‘The eyes do not perceive Him,’ for it is a
generalization that permits particularization. The visionary
experience of a saint trustworthy of religion and outstanding of
integrity serves to reinforce some of the Qur’ānic interpretations

12. Variation of a ╔adīth on the authority of Anas b. Mālik related by alTirmidhī: “It is possible that a disheveled, dusty person, with not many
belongings, not noticed among people, if he asks of Allah, Allah will grant
his prayer.”
13. Ubayy al-Mālik (d. 1423) wrote his book Ikmāl Ikmāl al-Mulim as a
commentary on Qadi Iyad’s Ikmal al-Mulim bi Fawayid Muslim, which was
itself a commentary on Imam al-Mazari’s al-Mulim bi Fawayidi Muslim, which
was itself a commentary on the ╔adīth collection by Muslim.
14. Shihāb al-Dīn A╕mad al-Qarāfī (d. 1285) was an Egyptian Maliki jurist
who is considered one of the greatest legal theoreticians of the thirteenth
century. For more on this figure, see Sherman Jackson, Islamic Law and the
State: the Constitutional Jurisprudence of Shihab al-Din al-Qarafi (Brill, 1996).
15. Kitāb al-Furūq was one of al-Qarāfī’s most important works on Islamic
law and legal theory.
186 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
(ta’wīlāt), and to particularize this generalization. The word of
the honest person is accepted for such particularization, as is the
word of the saints in regards to the saintly miracles falling
outside of ordinary custom which particularize the categorical
sciences. But how can this particularization apply to the general
populace, acquainted with nothing but conjecture?”
Shaykh Sīdī al-Mukhtār al-Kuntī said in al-Kawākib:
Consider this allegory to understand the meaning of the Real’s
simultaneous visibility (╛uhūr) and invisibility (bu╙ūn): sunlight
makes things apparent to the senses, but the blind do not realize
this, nor are the dim-sighted able to verify it. Sound faculties of
vision can sometimes be dimmed in the presence of a desire
(irāda). Ostensibly this desire is for the light of verification, but
really the desire only wants (to see) its own light, and to have the
knowledge of everything pass through its own light and
presence.
The same (visibility and invisibility) applies to Creator’s
Essential Being (Dhāt), Glorious and Exalted is He. The Essence,
distinguished by perfection and majesty, is apparent to every
individual. But they have been misguided by (secondary) causes
extraneous to the Divine Essence (Dhāt) and the requirements of
the Divine Attributes. So they have wandered astray in the
wastelands of misguidance.
Things are known only by their opposites. If the sunlight
was not followed by nighttime or was not covered sometimes by
thick clouds, people would have belittled the light, thinking
nothing of it at all. Al-Bū╗ayri, may Allah keep cool his tomb,
meant something like this when he said:
The close proximity of His mirror has hidden Him from
them
So the concealment is due to the intensity of the Divine
manifestation.
The Vision of Allah 187
This vision, concerning the possibility of which the
scholars have argued, is not the same vision (ru’ya) claimed by
those who have extinguished themselves (ahl al-fanā’) in the
Essence of the Real, Glorious and Exalted is He. Their vision is
not experienced with the human eye, nor with the heart, but
rather with the Eye of the Real, Glorious and Exalted is He.
And this Eye sees where there is no vision and no viewer.
Imam al-Jīlī ! referred to this when he wrote:
Allah has a manifestation behind the name and behind the
description
From which the eyes of the worlds are shrouded by slumber
Beware of considering this matter farfetched
Its reality is certainly close to those in whom is found the stamp
of truth
The Compassionate does not see except with His own Eye
And that is the definitive ruling in regards to the Divine Reality.
Imam al-‘Āshiqīn16 said:
Do not be one of those confused by sheets of paper
His understanding weighed down by trifling matters to the
point of agitation
For beyond the intellect (‘aql) is a knowledge so subtle –
Beyond the grasp of even the soundest minds
Its instruction is from me, and from me you have received it
My very soul has been an assistant in the giving.
One of the gnostic sages has said:
Say, “Allah!” and ignore the universe and what it contains,

16. Many Sufis have been given this title, “Leader of the Lovers.” The
reference here may be to Man╗ūr al-Hallāj (to whom the name seems to have
been applied frequently) or to the less-renowned Urdu-speaking
(Naqshbandi) Sufi who actually had the name, Imam al-‘Āshiqīn Qadri
Shakūri.
188 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
As your goal is the attainment of perfection.
Once you truly recognize Him, everything else besides Allah
Will cease to exist, whether separately or as a whole.
Know that you and all the worlds, if not for Him,
Would be in a state of obliteration and evanescence
Before His Divine Essence, nothing has existence in and of itself
Indeed, the (illusion of) existence other than Him is the essence
of deceit
So the gnostic sages have become extinct to themselves
Not seeing anything except Him, the Supreme, the Eminently
Exalted
And they have perceived that everything apart from Him, in
truth,
Is a vain deception, whether present, past or future.
Another gnostic sage has said:
Since coming to know Allah, I have not seen anything else
For (looking to) another is forbidden to us
Since being gathered (in the Divine Presence), I have not feared
being scattered
For today we have obtained the totality (of existence).
Another has said:
The secret of my secret is that, from the Paradise of Holiness, I
have been annihilated
But with this annihilation from myself I have been brought to
life
And I have been sent back to abide, in order to give expression
To the beauty of His Presence for all the thirsty ones, madly in
love
I have brought forth in the heavenly kingdom (malakūt)
astonishing things
The Vision of Allah 189
I have not encountered another of the creation similarly
endowed.
Another has said:
There are various passions in my heart
But when I see You, all my passions are gathered in one well of
longing.
There are many other such expressions of the Sufi people,
expressions drawing support from the flood (tayyār) of the
ocean of exclusive Divine Oneness (ba╕r al-taw╕īd al-khā╗). As
has been said by one of the Sufis, “Our mode of expression is
diverse, but the meaning of You is one; and we are all pointing
to that perfection.”
Whoever has any capacity for knowledge will understand
from what we have compiled that the words of the enraptured
saints (majādhīb) are based on a solid foundation. All of them
are firmly established in the Presence of Him of the Heavenly
Throne. Their expression comes from the light of a clean heart.
The one who criticizes them has been misguided far away
(from the truth), and is defective (of mind). He (the saint) does
not utter a word except that a solemn warden is there
watching him. We seek refuge from insolence before Allah,
from misfortune, bad judgment, the malice of enemies, and
from being distant after being close, and from withholding
after giving. I include myself in this plea, together with the
entirety of my brethren, believing men and women, by the
blessing of greatest cover (hijāb), the source of the most
precious gnosis, may Allah bless him, grant him peace; and
may He honor, exalt, ennoble and glorify him.
My way is clear to someone who is rightly guided
But passions obscure, so you have been rendered blind.
190 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Our complaint is to Allah concerning a people among
whom we find ourselves. They do not know, they do not
learn, they do not ask, they will not accept the truth, they will
not submit, they will not hold their tongues. Each one is the
most ignorant of fools, but he considers himself the most
learned of scholars. Each one dares to issue formal legal
opinions, though he does not possess the requisite knowledge
of what is involved. He is quick to accuse others of unbelief
(kufr), though he does not know the definition of unbelief. Nor
does he know the threat involving in making such an
accusation, since an authentic report has the Prince of
Messengers ! saying: “If someone says to brother, ‘O
unbeliever!’ one of the two is guilty of unbelief.”17 In other
words, if the one who is accused is not an unbeliever, it is the
accuser who is the unbeliever. We take refuge with Allah from
ignorance. The Prophet ! also said, “If someone says, ‘The
people have perished!’ he is the one of them most surely
doomed to perdition.”18 Our Shaykh Tijānī, may Allah be
pleased with him and us for his sake, once said:
We have a degree (martaba) in the Presence of Allah the Most
High, the grandeur of which is not possible to divulge, and it is
something other than which I told you about already. If I were to
mention it, the people of truth and gnosis would concur on my
being put to death, let alone the enemies of the gnostics. The
particularity of this degree includes the fact that if someone does
not take care to amend his (bad) thoughts of our companions, he

17. Variation of a ╔adīth reported in the ╔adīth collections of Bukhārī, Abū
Dāwūd and Tirmidhī. Bukhārī’s version (on the authority of Abū Darr) is:
“No man accuses another man of being a sinner, or of being an unbeliever,
but it reflects back on him if the other is not as he called him.”
18. ╔adīth reported in the collections of Bukhārī, Abū Dāwūd, the Muwatta’
of Imam Mālik and the Musnad of A╕mad b. Hanbal.
The Vision of Allah 191
is doomed to perdition. The refuge from that is with Allah the
Most High.
May Allah deliver us from affliction and include us among
His chosen and beloved ones. May He enlist us among the
elite of the elite companions of Shaykh Tijānī, the Seal of the
Saints. May He quench our thirst from his ocean with the most
splendid of goblets. May He unite us with him, and with his
grandfather al-‘Adnānī ! in the abode of happiness. Surely
Allah is the Guarantor of that, ultimately Capable.
This marks the end of the chapters. With Allah is the
success on the straight path, and to Him, may He be glorified,
is the return and final destination.
193
CONCLUSION
Our Confidant Reliance on the Tijānī
Spiritual Path
Success is with Allah, and it is He who guides to the
straight path by His grace.
t is no secret that the Tijānī Spiritual Path (al-╘arīqa alTijāniyya) is the most excellent of paths. The ones that hold
to this path are the most exemplary of groups, since this is
the Abrahamic, Mu╕ammadan, A╕madi path. Its exterior is
the noble virtues of the Sacred Law (sharī’a), and its interior is
the product of the Divine Reality (╕aqīqa). There is nothing
found in its practices or arrangements of litanies except
something explicitly commanded by Allah in His Mighty
Book. So you will not find anything of which Allah does not
approve, either explicitly or implicitly. The Tijānī litany (wird)
consists of seeking forgiveness, invoking blessing upon the
Prophet !, saying “there is nothing worthy of worship but
Allah,” and reciting verses of the Qur’ān. Moreover, this litany
was received from the Prophet ! (by Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī)
I
194 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
in a waking state, not while sleeping. He it was who set firm
its foundation with his noble hand, and arranged it for our
Imam as a miraculous gift for this mercifully-blessed Muslim
community (umma).
Since the time Allah brought forth this Tijānī litany from
the ocean of Divine bounty, and people became aware of its
benefit, it has profited humanity, in times gone by and times
present, outwardly and inwardly, in all regions of the earth, in
rural and urban areas. Even the negligent servant, far removed
from his Lord – actually at war with Allah and those (saints) in
charge of him – can meet this Imam or one of his disciples, and
Allah will instill love for this Imam in his heart. He will
receive the litany, his spiritual state will be transformed, and
he will be included among the noble servants of Allah. He will
purify himself, perform the ritual prayers and keep the fast (of
Ramadan). He will love the people of Allah, and he will love
the best of mankind !. In a very short time, it will be clear that
he is among the chosen, select few. This is a matter witnessed
by anyone who knows the spiritual path of this Imam, even if
he is one of its enemies casting blame. So anyone aware of this
magnanimous grace should strive to excel in performing this
splendid (Tijānī) litany.
By the grace of Him who rules the unseen and the seen,
good fortune drove me towards this A╕madi-Tijānī spiritual
presence (al-╕a╓rat al-A╕madiyya al-Tijāniyya) to join the
community of this Lordly Mu╕ammadan spiritual chain
(silsila). I obtained this splendid litany and tremendous benefit
from the Imam, my Shaykh and father, al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah b.
al-Sayyid Mu╕ammad. He was surely the unique figure (farīd)
of his age, the proof (╕ujja) for the people of his time, the sweet
well (zamzam) of litanies and secrets, the confluence of
Our confidant reliance on the Tijānī Spiritual Path 195
remembrances and lights. He was the most erudite scholar, the
most perceptive and understanding role-model (qudwa), the
deputy (khalīfa) of Shaykh al-Tijānī without doubt and the
bearer of his Path’s banner in the lands of the West. He was
surely one of the saints, among those who balance (knowledge
of) the Sacred Law (sharī’a) and the Divine Reality (╕aqīqa).
May his Generous Lord never cease to promote him to the
most praiseworthy station.
Time promised to produce the like of him (again)
Your promise was a lie, O time, so make amends.
He trained me (rabbānī) by means of this A╕madi litany,
and took charge of my spiritual training (tarbiya) and learning
(ta’līm). Praise be to Allah, I received from him rare benefits
(fawā’id), blessed secrets, remembrances and (spiritual)
practices (‘awā’id). He was an accredited instructor (muqaddam)
in the spiritual path, with absolute authorization from its
leading folk. All of his shaykhs granted him unlimited
sanction. Eleven chains of spiritual transmission (silsila) are
linked to him, both unlimited and limited. These are well
known and have been charted systematically by one of the
brethren as a precious gift to all generations. He now has been
taken from his life in this world. May Allah be pleased with
him and us on his behalf. May Allah grant him the best
reward, on my account and on account of all the Muslims.
He made an agreement with one of the shaykhs of the
Spiritual Path who used to come to him, a true inheritor of its
secrets. This was the distinguished Sharīf, the most competent
scholar, Mu╕ammad Ma╕mūd al-Shinjītī al-Tīshītī b.
196 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Mu╕ammad al-Saghīr b. A╕mad al-╖aghīr.1 The Shaykh, my
father, gave him authorization for everything he had, and
indicated to him that he did that in order for the Sharīf to
grant me unlimited permission, saying explicitly that I was
worthy of that. One of the spiritually unveiled people said to
him concerning this, “There is no need to appoint one of the
creation (to appoint your son), he already has been appointed
by the Creator, Most High.” This happened when I was still
young. When my father passed, the Sharīf came to me and
granted me unlimited authorization according to the
instruction of my father. Just as my father’s shaykhs gave him
unlimited authorization, and he gave unlimited authorization
to the Sharīf, so did he give me unlimited authorization. Praise
be to Allah, in the beginning and end. Here is the text of his
certificate of authorization (ijāza):
In the Name of Allah, all praise is due to Allah.
O Allah, bless our master Mu╕ammad and grant him peace.
This poorest slave of Allah, Mu╕ammad Ma╕mūd b.
Mu╕ammad b. A╕mad al-╖aghīr says: I have authorized my
brother in Allah, in the Messenger and in the Shaykh (al-Tijānī),
Ibrāhīm b. al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah, to assume the role of instructor
and director. I have granted him unconditional authorization in
everything coming to me from the Shaykh (al-Tijānī), just as
Shaykh al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah granted me gave me unlimited
authorization. In his certificate of authorization to me (which
now also applies to Shaykh Ibrāhīm), he said: “Allah blessed me
to encounter some of the distinguished companions of the
Shaykh (al-Tijānī), may Allah be pleased with them. I conversed

1. Mu╕ammad Ma╕mūd b. Mu╕ammad al-╖aghīr al-Shinqītī, of the Idaw
‘Alī tribe in Mauritania, was the son of Mu╕ammad b. Mu╕ammad al-╖aghīr
al-Shinqītī, author of al-Jaysh al-Kafīl, and nephew of ‘Ubayda b. Mu╕ammad
al-╖aghīr, author of Mīzāb al-Ra╕ma.
Our confidant reliance on the Tijānī Spiritual Path 197
with them concerning the secrets and gnostic sciences, and they
appointed me with their true authorizations. I hereby grant
permission and authorization to this beloved brother, according
to what has been conferred on me, in regards to the secrets, the
supplications, the Names, the secret of the Greatest Name, the
Qur’ānic chapter of Power (sūra al-qadr), the incantation of the
sea (hizb al-bahr), the (prayer of the) Opener (al-fāti╕) and its three
degrees, the key of being the saintly pole (miftāh al-qutbaniyya),
and every secret established as having come from the Shaykh
(al-Tijānī). I have taken from him the oath to fear Allah, that he
seeks nothing by this except the Noble Countenance of Allah,
and that he not give the secret to anyone except the deserving.
Sufficient for me is Allah, the most excellent Custodian. There is
no strength or power except by Allah, the Most High, the
Almighty. May Allah’s blessing and peace be upon our master
Mu╕ammad.”
This certificate of authorization was written in the year
1340 (1922), the year of my father’s passing, the year of the
sun.2 Permission also came to me from the Shaykh (al-Tijānī)
himself. I met him while asleep, but a sleep that was like
wakefulness. He did this to me many times. I also met my
father (like this) many times, and he would say to me,
“Everything I have left is for you, so take it from others.” He
told me other things as well, but they cannot be written here.

2. If the numerological equivalent of the Arabic letters in ‘ām shams (year of
the sun) are added together, they equal 1340. Apparently the year was wellknown by this name in the Senegambian region: the Mouride scholar
Shaykh Mbacke Boussou eulogized the deaths of al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah Niasse
and al-╔ājj Mālik Sy in this year, “A sun and a sun disappeared in the year
of the sun/ And mankind cried for the overwhelming darkness” (See
Shaykh ╔asan Cisse, “ al-Tariqa al-Tijāniyya: al-Khasā’is wa al-Mamayazāt,”
speech at the Forum for the Followers of the Tijāniyya Order, Fes, Morocco,
June 29, 2007).
198 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Absolute authorization also came to me from the marvel of
the age, my shaykh, my support (sanad), my master, al-╔ājj
‘Abd-Allah b. al-╔ājj al-‘Alawi.3 All fingers point to him as the
one endowed with the greatest sainthood. He was a lordly
gnostic, inheritor of the Imam al-Tijānī’s spiritual training due
to his knowledge of the sciences of gnosis and Divine realities,
to the point that no concealment or hiding could cover up his
widespread fame in these areas. He received his own
authorization from his shaykh, Shaykh A╕mad, and he from
his shaykh, Shaykh Mu╕amdi – known as “Baddi b.
Sayyidayn” – who received it from Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-
╔āfi╛, and he from the Seal of Saints, Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī.
May Allah be pleased with them all and allow us to benefit
from them. By the hand of this Shaykh, I benefited from the
sciences and secrets that cannot be written on paper or seen by
mere glances. With him is my dependence in the domain of
spiritual experience (adhwāq), for he was the proof thereof in
his time. May Allah be pleased with him and us for his sake.
Here is the text of the certificate of authorization he gave me
(written on his behalf by his disciple):
In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful, He who
is known, who commanded the invocation on the hidden master
(al-sayyid al-maktūm). Praise be to Allah, praise which is due from
His entire creation. And blessing and peace upon him who was
made the original source.
I have been commanded by my shaykh, father and guide, al-
╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah b. al-╔ājj, to write for Ibrāhīm b. al-╔ājj ‘AbdAllah, that he has granted him permission to give the creation
(khalq) spiritual guidance (irshād) and training (tarbiya) through
word and deed. He is authorized to teach the litanies (awrād) and

3. Al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah b. al-╔ājj al-Alawi (d. 1927) has been mentioned
previously for his statements concerning the Fay╓a.
Our confidant reliance on the Tijānī Spiritual Path 199
the remembrances (adhkār), both obligatory and supererogatory,
the general ones and the special ones. This is a complete
permission for everything for which exists an authentic report
from the Shaykh (al-Tijānī) !. He has granted him an absolutely
unlimited authorization, linking his rope in this to his own until
the Day of Judgment, or rather for all eternity. This is because he
sees him as deserving of all of that. This document has been
written by Mu╕ammad ‘Abd al-Ra╕mān b. al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah b.
al-╔ājj, who gives witness to the above, in the year 1345 (1926-7).
Unlimited authorization also came to me by way of the
consummate scholar, the knowledgeable one of Allah, Sīdī
Mu╕ammad al-Kabīr b. al-Sayyid A╕mad b. Mi╕amm b. al-
‘Abbās al-‘Alawi, who received it from Shaykh A╕mad b.
Baddi, and him from Shaykh Mu╕amdi, and him from Shaykh
Mu╕ammad al- ╔āfi╛, and him from the Seal of the Saints,
Shaykh A╕mad Tijānī.4 May Allah be pleased with them all.
Sayyid Mu╕ammad al-Kabīr had other certificates of
authorization from several paths. One linked him to Sīdī Musa
b. Ma’zūz, to Sīdī Mu╕ammad b. Abī al-Na╗r,5 and to Sīdī al-
╔ājj ‘Abd al-Wahhāb b. al-A╕mar.6 May Allah be pleased with
them all, and may He allow us to benefit from them. Here is
the text of his certificate of authorization to me:

4. This is same silsila of al-╔ājj ‘Abd-Allah b. al-╔ājj. The significance of
these certificates of authorization is that early on Shaykh Ibrāhīm was given
license by some of renowned “Hafiziyya”-Tijāniyya shaykhs in Mauritania.
5. Sīdī Mu╕ammad b. Abī al-Nā╗ir was a companion of Shaykh A╕mad
Tijānī in Fes, and one of fourteen which he granted unlimited authorization
(ijāza mutlaqa).
6. Sīdī ‘Abd al-Wahhāb al-A╕mar was a close companion of Shaykh A╕mad
Tijānī, one of ten concerning whom the Prophet guaranteed the “grand
illumination” (fat╕ al-akbar) in a vision to Shaykh A╕mad Tijānī. He
accompanied Sīdī ‘Alī Harāzim to the Hijaz and buried him there when he
died before returning back to Fes.
200 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Praise be to Allah in His Oneness, and may the blessing of Allah
be upon our master and patron Mu╕ammad, and may it include
his family and companions.
I have authorized our most excellent brother, the
consummate scholar who has arrived (in the Divine Presence),
who has combined the knowledge of the Sacred Law and of the
Divine Reality. I authorize him in the spiritual path for all the
remembrances originating from Shaykh al-Tijānī, the obligatory
and supererogatory. This is a complete authorization, in general
and particular, just as I received it from Sīdī al-Ghālī b. Musa b.
Ma’zūz, who received it from his father, who received it from
our Shaykh al-Tijānī. May Allah be pleased with them and
pleased with us for their sake. Sīdī al-Ghali b. Musa said that his
father, who had given him his authorization, had received
authorizations from Mu╕ammad b. Abī al-Na╗r and ‘Abd alWahhāb b. al-A╕mar.7 This authorization is also as I have
received it from my Shaykh A╕mad b. Baddi, who received it
from his father, who received it from Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-
╔āfi╛, who received it from Shaykh al-Tijānī, who received it
from Allah’s Messenger !. The recipient of this authorization is
the master previously mentioned, Ibrāhīm, son of the perfect
gnostic and arrived Shaykh, al-╔ājj Sīdī ‘Abd-Allah Niasse, may
Allah never cease to raise him in the Holy Presence. I grant him
permission to grant permission for what has been mentioned
here to anybody else who is fully qualified. This has been
written by Mu╕ammad al-Kabīr b. A╕mad b. Mi╕amm b. al-
‘Abbās al-‘Alawi, may Allah reserve grace for them, on the 22nd
of Dhu al-Qa’da, 1345 (May 24, 1927).
Absolute permission also came to this poor servant from
the greatest deputy (al-khalīfa al-akbar), the most famous

7. The implication here is that although Mūsā b. Ma’zūz took from Shaykh
A╕mad Tijānī directly, he received his unlimited authorization (ijāza
mu╙laqa) from these other two fully-licensed companions of the Shaykh.
Our confidant reliance on the Tijānī Spiritual Path 201
beacon, rare like red sulfur, the brightest full moon, the
distinguished Shaykh Mu╕ammad Sa’īd b. al-Shaykh A╕mad
b. al-Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛. He received it from his
father Sīdī A╕mad, who received it from his Shaykh Baddi,
who received from Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛, who
received it from the Seal of Saints, A╕mad al-Tijānī. May Allah
be pleased with them and us on their account. Here is the text
of the certificate of authorization:
Praise be to Allah, Lord of all the worlds. Blessings and peace be
upon the Master of Messengers. The writer is greeting his
beloved and his bosom-friend, the cultured and intelligent
master, Shaykh Ibrāhīm the son of Shaykh ‘Abd-Allah. May we
continue to be blessed with assistance from the Generous Lord. I
must inquire about your condition, the condition of your family,
and the condition of those Tijānīs with you. May Allah include
us and all of you among the elite of the elite among them.
It is incumbent on me to grant you absolute authorization in
the path of our Shaykh and means of access to our Lord, Sīdī
A╕mad al-Tijānī. This is an authorization to receive and to give,
common knowledge to the common folk and special knowledge
for the elite. Therein is the secret of the secret. This
(authorization) is because I would deeply cherish being included
in your spiritual chain (silsila), that I might enjoy the gracious
favor of your supplication. I would dearly love for there to exist
between us something special, and this for the Hereafter, since
this world has little relevance to the subject at hand.
I inform you of something I hope Allah will make you party
to. I am the youngest of my father’s children, and when he left
me in charge of them, I became both a disciple (talmīdh) and
father. When I did this, they became my children and disciples.8

8. The reference here is to the fact that Shaykh Ibrāhīm was one of the
younger children of his own father, though his renown surpassed that of his
202 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Pay no attention to what the people say, but ask Allah for help in
everything that concerns you. May Allah reward you with the
best, on our behalf and behalf of all Muslims. This has been
written by your brother and loving friend, Mu╕ammad Sa’īd b.
A╕mad b. Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛ in the year 1349 (1930-1).
Thus the staff shined, and by it was the destination attained,
As the traveler’s eye is cooled by the homecoming.
Those are the forefathers, so bring me the like of them
Since you have joined us, O poet (Jarīr)9 of the assemblies.
May Allah grant our masters the best reward on our
behalf, and may He be well pleased with them, and they well
pleased with Him.
In reality, our affiliation and link today are with Shaykh alTijānī, the Seal of Saints, without intermediary, since he is
always present with us. Praise be to Allah, to Him belongs the
favor. It is related that Abū al-╔asan al-Shādhilī once was
asked about his shaykh. He said:
I used to be affiliated with ‘Abd al-Salām b. al-Mashīsh, but
today I am swimming in ten oceans. Five of them are Adamic
beings: Mu╕ammad !, Abū Bakr, ‘Umar, ‘Uthmān and ‘Alī, may
Allah be pleased with them. The other five consist of spiritual
beings: (the Angels) Gabriel, Michael, Izrā’īl, Isrāfīl and the Spirit
(al-Rū╕).

brothers. Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-Sa’īd is advising Shaykh Ibrāhīm to treat
his brothers with respect despite the talk of the naysayers.
9. Jarīr b. ‘Atiya al-Khatfi (d. 728) was a famous Arab poet in the court of
Umar b. Abd al-Aziz (Umar II), the Umayyad Sultan in Damascus. Among
the three most famous poets of his age (Akhtal, Farazdaq and himself), he
was the most apt to incorporate religious themes in his poetry, and was the
only poet accepted into the court of the pious Sultan Umar II. See Louis
Gardet, “Religion and Culture,” in Holt, Lambton and Lewis (eds.),
Cambridge History of Islam, Volume 2 (Cambridge UP, 1977), p. 576.
Our confidant reliance on the Tijānī Spiritual Path 203
And we are in a single ocean, which has no shore, no limit,
no termination and no end. And this ocean derives from an
ocean without shore, limit, termination or end, which supplies
its vastness. And this ocean derives from the Presence of the
Absolute (╕a╓rat al-i╙lāq), which supplies its vastness and
lordliness (rubūviyya).10 “And for this let those who strive
aspire” (Qur’ān, 83:26).
Those are the forefathers, so bring me the like of them
Since you have joined us, O poet (Jarīr) of the assemblies.
This brings us to the end of the book. With Allah is the
success on the straight path, and to Him the Glorified is the
return and final destination. The book has been written with
the permission and assistance of the Concealed Presence (al-
╕a╓rat al-katmiyya) 11 by the poor servant in need of the
Merciful’s mercy, Ibrāhīm the son of Shaykh al-╔ājj ‘AbdAllah. May he never cease to be enamored of the beauty of his
Lord. I drafted it in nine days, in an age of ignorance,
encroaching darkness, increasing (worldly) preoccupation of
human beings, stagnation of minds, languishing of thought,
and extinction of sagacity. I am apologizing to those of
understanding for any shortcomings found in this book. With
Allah as my witness, I beseech the reader to consider it fairly
and with the eye of approval.
The eye of approval blinks at every fault
While the eye of resentment makes appear the faults.
Whoever considers (this book) with eye of approval, he
will see that it is from the Flood of the Tijānī Seal, owner of the

10. The reference here is to the ocean of the Seal of Saints, deriving from the
ocean of the Seal of Prophets, deriving from the Presence of Allah.
11. In other words, the Hidden Pole (al-qu╙b al-maktūm), Shaykh A╕mad alTijānī.
204 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Divine secret; for it collects the cream of the books authored on
this discipline. Seldom will you find a compilation (majmū’)
containing what this contains. Whoever examines it closely
and judges it fairly will know for certain that this compilation
was authored by Shaykh al-Tijānī with his own hand.
I ask Allah the Most High – by means of Him, of the Seal
of His Prophets and of the Seal of His Saints – to allow us and
all Muslims to benefit by this book. May He accept it from us
with beautiful approval. May He put tremendous blessing
(baraka) in it, to the extent that it may bless any place it is
found. May He make it a source of discernment for the
spiritual path and its people, stringing them together (like
pearls) in the company of the Noble Seal. “The day when
neither wealth nor sons are of benefit, save him who comes to
Allah with a sound heart” (Qur’ān, 26:88-9).
The rough draft was completed on Friday evening, the
eighteenth of Muharram in the year 1350 (June 5, 1931), in the
town of Kaolack. Peace. With thanks to Allah and His most
beautiful assistance, The Removal of Confusion, has been
completed. It is followed by an appendix by the author.
205
AUTHOR’S APPENDIX
Introduction: On Spiritual Training
and Saintly Authority
In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful,
and may Allah’s blessing and peace be upon our
master Mu╕ammad, as well as on his family and
companions. We begin by offering Him the praise that
befits His Majesty, and by invoking His blessing upon
the best of His distinguished elite, and upon all his
companions and family.
 have attached this Appendix of several sections to our
work, The Removal of Confusion. Anyone interested in the
sciences of the spiritual path will find it indispensably
precious. I ask Allah for His acceptance and favor, from the
beginning to the end. He is the Originator, the Restorer, the
Forgiving, the Loving, the Lord of the Glorious Throne, Who
does what He wills. With Allah is all success, and He is the
Guide by His Grace to the straight path.
I
206 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
More on the Continuance of Spiritual Training (tarbiya)
and its Method
Here are the words of Shaykh Sīdī al-Mukhtār al-Kuntī in his
book Jannat al-Murīd, as cited in al-Jaysh:1
How astonishing is the negative criticism of the saintly miracles
(karāmāt) by the Qur’ān readers (qurrā’) of the present time. And
how amazing is their allegation that spiritual training (tarbiya)
has ceased since the year 800 (1397 C.E.), basing their opinion on
the statement of Zarrūq, may Allah have mercy on him:
“Spiritual training has ceased to be practiced…” It does not
occur to them that he was referring only to the Maghrib. The
cessation of spiritual training is indeed possible for a particular
time or particular place. No one maintains the existence of a
spiritual trainer (murabbi) in every land, or such a trainer’s fixed
residence in one place indefinitely. Those endowed with powers
of verification, from the righteous early forefathers to those that
came later, have agreed on the (continued) existence of someone
bearing the burdens of spiritual training, without reference to
number or place of such individuals. Thus the cessation of
spiritual training in the Maghrib (in the time of Zarrūq) does not
conflict with the unanimous agreement (ijmā’) of the scholars
concerning its existence in general. There is sure to be a spiritual
trainer (even if there is none in the Maghrib) in Black Africa
(sūdān), for instance, or in Egypt, or in the two Holy Places
(Mecca and Medina), or in Syria, or in Iraq. He may be assigned
to a single place, or to a number of places. Whenever Allah the
Exalted wishes the residents of a locality to benefit from his
assistance, He reveals his special quality for the people living
there. He may also reside in a place where Allah has decreed the
inhabitants suffer deprivation and banishment from His

1. al-Jaysh al-Kafīl bi Akhdh al-Thār mimman salla ‘ala al-Tijānī sayf al-inkār, was
authored by Mu╕ammad b. Mu╕ammad al-Saghīr Tashītī (d. 1869,
Mauritania), a prominent Tijānī scholar tracing his initiation through Shaykh
Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛.
Introduction: On Spiritual Training and Saintly Authority 207
Presence, so they fail to benefit by his help. Indeed, the special
quality of the spiritual trainer is covered with the veil of human
nature, so his contemporaries say, “This is only a human being
like you, who eats what you eat and drinks what you drink”
(Qur’ān, 23:33).
This denial is especially true of the Qur’ān readers
associated with excellence in describing the sciences (rasm al-
‘ulūm). It has been said of the likes of them:
They said so-and-so is an excellent scholar
So offer him the reverence he deserves
I replied, ‘since he has no fear (of Allah)
The Divine Obstructer (al-Māni’) prevents compliance.’
Such scholars’ denial of the existence of spiritual trainers,
and of the continuance of spiritual training, is nothing but
conjecture. It is at general variance with the Sacred Law and in
explicit contradiction with the textual sources. If they deny the
very principle of sainthood, they have no basis for their disbelief.
They are proven false by more than two hundred verses of
Allah’s Book, either explicitly or by necessary implication, and
by more than three hundred Prophetic traditions. If the source
for their denial is the alleged cessation of spiritual training, they
are in fact claiming the cessation of the religion itself. For this
they have no proof whatsoever, neither from the Qur’ān, the
Prophetic Sunnah, nor the consensus of the scholars. They are
disproved manifestly by several Prophetic traditions, including
the following:
My community is like the rain: there is no telling whether
the first of its members are the best, or the last of them.
A party from my community will always be committed to
the Truth. They will not be harmed by those who oppose
and desert them, until Allah’s command comes while they
are in that state.
208 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Perhaps they allege the cessation of Sufism, while
maintaining the continuation of the other formal sciences. Then
the Qur’ān and the Sunnah bear witness against them, censure
them, refute them and utterly disprove them. The result of the
knowledge of Divine Reality (╕aqīqa) is nothing less than the
essential knowledge of the Real (al-╔aqq). Allah’s Messenger !
said, “Every truth (╕aqq) has a reality (╕aqīqa).”2 Those who
explain the Prophetic traditions draw the analogy of a nut-shell
and a kernel: the shell being the Sacred Law (sharī’a) and the
kernel being the Reality (╕aqīqa). A kernel without a shell
becomes rotten and putrid, and a shell with no kernel inside is
worthless. This is also indicated by the verse, “They were only
commanded to worship Allah, sincerely devoting the religion to
Him” (Qur’ān, 98:5). So Allah the Almighty and Glorious has
informed us that worship must include sincere devotion (ikhlā╗),
meaning pure intention free from hypocritical ostentation, from
the beginning to end. Allah’s Messenger ! said: “Allah does not
look at your bodies, or your forms, but he does look at your
hearts.”3
It is indisputable that the rectification of hearts can only be
achieved with the sciences of spiritual discipline and practice,
which are a branch of the science of Divine Reality (‘ilm al-
╕aqīqa). The person who alleges the cessation of this science is
suggesting the bankruptcy of the Sacred Law and the
disappearance of its harvest. For the harvest of the Sacred Law is
steadfast righteousness (istiqāma). The Sacred Law establishes
the formal structure of Islam, while the (science of) Divine
Reality determines the real meaning of Islam. The Sacred Law
represents the body of Islam, the Reality represents its spirit.
In another instructive passage, Sīdī al-Mukhtār al-Kuntī said:

2. ╔adīth reported by Imam al-╘abarānī in al-Mu’jam al-Kabīr and by Ibn
Shayba in al-Musannaf, and cited by ‘Alā’ al-Dīn al-Hindī in Kanz al-Ummāl fi
Sunan al-Aqwāl wa al-Af’āl.
3. ╔adīth reported in the collections of Imam Muslim and Ibn Mājah.
Introduction: On Spiritual Training and Saintly Authority 209
Know that the shaykhs have two methods of spiritual training
(tarbiya). The first one is centered on gratitude (shukr) and
happiness on account of the Benefactor, without trouble or toil.
The second one is centered on spiritual discipline (riyā╓a), labor,
hardship, sleeplessness and hunger.
When discussing the virtues of Sīdī ‘Abd al-‘Azīz (alDabbāgh), the author of al-Dhahab al-Ibrīz said:
The path of gratitude (╙arīqat al-shukr) is the original way,
practiced by the hearts of the Prophets and the bosom friends
among their companions. It means to worship Him with sincere
devotion and detachment from all worldly interests. The servant
acknowledges his incapacity and shortcoming, and his failure to
fulfill the right of Divinity. By necessity, this preoccupies his
heart at all times. When Allah recognizes truthfulness (╗idq) in
such servants, He grants them favors commensurate with His
generosity: spiritual illumination in knowing (ma’rifa) Him, and
obtainment of the secrets of belief (imān) in Him, Mighty and
Glorious is He.
When the people of spiritual discipline (riyā╓a) heard of the
illumination (fat╕) achieved by these people, they made such
illumination their goal. They pursued it by means of fasting,
standing in supererogatory prayer, sleeplessness and constant
seclusion (khalwa), until they achieved what they achieved. The
emigration (hijra) of the first way (gratitude) is only to Allah and
His Messenger, not for the sake of spiritual illumination (fat╕)
and the attainment of mystical discoveries (kashūfāt). The
emigration of the second way (discipline and deprivation) is for
the sake of illumination and the attainment of degrees (marātib).
The journey in the first is the journey of hearts. The journey in
the second is the journey of bodies. Illumination in the first
comes as a sudden surprise, for the servant has no expectation of
it, contrary to the illumination of the second.
The two paths are both correct, but the path of gratitude is
more correct and more sincere. Both practice spiritual exercise,
210 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
but the exercise of the first is of the hearts. The exertion is in their
attachment to Allah the Glorious, their persistent attendance at
His door, their turning back to Him in all moments of movement
and stillness. The people of the first path remain constantly
devoted to this, even if their appearance is not clothed in a great
deal of worshipful activities (‘ibāda). For this reason, the master
of this path may fast, or break his fast, stay awake (at night) or
sleep. He may spend time with women, and perform any other
of the duties within the Sacred Law that conflict with the
discipline (riyā╓a) of physical bodies.
Our Shaykh Abū al-‘Abbās Sīdī A╕mad b. Mu╕ammad alTijānī ! used to say:
Gratitude (shukr) is the door of Allah, and the closest of doors to
Him. That is why Satan sits next to it, for Allah the Most High
relates his statement, “I shall lurk in ambush for them on Your
straight path” (Qur’ān, 7:16). In this time, whoever does not
enter through the door of gratitude does not enter (the Divine
Presence). This is because the ego-selves have become thick and
rebellious, so they are not restrained by being called to account
or argumentation, and they are impervious to discipline (riyā╓a).
But if they are drowned in rejoicing (fara╕) with the Benefactor,
they will absent themselves from this (rebellion), and end their
distance (from their Lord).
The Continued Existence of Saints in the Present Time
In Rū╕ al-Bayān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān, Ismā’īl al-╔aqqī al-Burūsī4 –
the erudite Shaykh who combines (knowledge) of the Sacred
Law with (knowledge) of the Divine Reality, the seal of Qur’ān
interpreters, may Allah sanctify his innermost being – gave the
following commentary on the verse, “And among those whom

4. The ten-volume Qur’ānic exegesis of Isma’īl al-Haqqī Barusi (or Burusawi
or Bursawi, d. 1724, Anatolia), Rū╕ al-Bayān, is one of the most
comprehensive Sufi exegeses of the Qur’ān.
Introduction: On Spiritual Training and Saintly Authority 211
We created there is a community who guide with the Truth
and by it establish justice” (Qur’ān, 7:181).
The Prophet ! is reported as having said, “Among my
community there will be people devoted to the Truth, until
Jesus, peace upon him, comes down (from Heaven).”5 The
meaning is that no period of time will be without them. The
great Shaykh ╖adr al-Dīn al-Qunawī,6 may Allah sanctify his
inner being, quoted the Prophetic tradition, “The Final Hour will
not arrive until ‘Allah, Allah’ ceases to be uttered on the earth.”
The Shaykh explained in Kitāb al-Fukūk, “The Prophet confirmed
it repeatedly. There is no doubt that no one genuinely
remembers Allah – and especially with this Comprehensive
Supreme Name, which carries with it the attributes of all the
Divine Names – except that he who knows the Real with
complete gnosis (ma’rifa). In every era, the one of creation with
the most complete knowledge of Allah is His deputy (khalīfa), for
he is the perfect one of that time. The Prophet ! said, ‘The Final
Hour will not arrive as long as there is a perfect human being
(insān kāmil) upon the earth.’7 He is the delegated spiritual pillar.
If you want you could call him the one for whose sake the
universe is kept intact. If (this position) were taken away, the sky
would be shattered, the sun would be divested of light, the stars
would fall, the pages (╗u╕uf) would be scattered, the earth would
split asunder, and the Resurrection would be at hand.”
He (Ismā’īl al-╔aqqī) also related the report transmitted by
Ibn Mas’ūd ! in which the Prophet ! said:

5. ╔adīth cited by al-Suyū╙ī in al-Durr al-Manthūr, and by Ibn Abī ╔ātim in
his commentary of the Qur’ān.
6. Shaykh al-Islam Sadr al-Dīn al-Qunawi (d. 1274, Konya) was the closest
disciple of Ibn al-‘Arabi al-Hatimi, through whom most of his works are
related. The work cited from here, Kitab al-Fukuk, is a commentary on Ibn al-
‘Arabi’s Fusus al-Hikam.
7. ╔adīth related in the ╖a╕ī╕ of Imam Muslim and the Musnad Imam
A╕mad b. Hanbal.
212 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Allah has on the earth three hundred (servants) whose hearts are
upon the heart of Adam. He has forty whose hearts are on the
heart of Moses. He has seven whose hearts are on the heart of
Abraham. He has five whose hearts are on the heart of (the
Angel) Gabriel. He has three whose hearts are on the heart of
(the Angel) Michael, and He has one whose heart is on the heart
of (the Angel) Isrāfīl.8 If the one (on the heart of Isrāfīl) dies,
Allah replaces him with one of the three (on the heart of
Michael). If one of the three dies, Allah replaces him with one of
the five (on the heart of Gabriel). If one of the five dies, Allah
replaces him with one of the seven (on the heart of Abraham). If
one of the seven dies, Allah replaces him with one of the forty
(on the heart of Moses). If one of the forty dies, Allah replaces
him with one of the three hundred (on the heart of Adam). If one
of the three hundred dies, Allah replaces him with one of the
ordinary people (al-‘āmma). By them, Allah drives away
affliction from the community.9
He commented:
The unique one mentioned in this Prophetic tradition is the
saintly Pole (al-qu╙b), the Succor (al-ghawth). His position and
rank among the saints is like the point at the center of a circle:
the focal point of the universe’s well-being.
He then cited a narration from Abū Dardā’:
Allah has servants called the Substitutes (Abdāl). They have not
achieved what they have achieved through a great deal of
fasting, ritual prayer, outward displays of humility or beautiful
embellishment. They have achieved it through genuine piety,
good intention, peaceful hearts and compassion for the entirety
of the Muslim community. Allah favored them with His

8. The Angel Isrāfīl, or Raphael, is the Angel responsible for blowing the
horn on the Day of Judgment.
9. ╔adīth reported by Ibn al-Jawzi in al-Mawdū’āt, and Imam al-Dhahabi in
Mīzān al-I’tidāl. A similar narration is found in al-Hindi, Kanz al-Ummāl fi
Sunan al-Aqwāl wa al-Af’āl.
Introduction: On Spiritual Training and Saintly Authority 213
knowledge and has chosen them for Himself. They are forty men
whose character is like the heart of Abraham. No man among
them will die until Allah has created someone to replace him.
They do not revile or curse anything. They do not abuse those
who are beneath them. They do not treat anything with
contempt. They do not envy those above them. They are the best
of people in goodness, gentleness of temperament and
generosity of disposition. In what is between them and their
Lord, spurred horses and tempestuous winds cannot overtake.
Their hearts find contentment in the highest firmaments,
ascending to Allah. They compete with one another in good
deeds: “They are Allah’s party. Surely Allah’s party are the ones
who prosper” (Qur’ān, 58:22).
Imam Abū al-Mawāhib al-Tūnisī10 said in one of his wise
counsels:
Beware of saying, ‘The great saints and truthful dervishes
(fuqarā’) have disappeared.’ They have not really disappeared:
they are like a treasure belonging to the owner of the vault.
Allah may grant someone who comes near the End of Time what
He withheld from the people of earlier times. In this way, Allah
the Most High gave to Mu╕ammad ! what He did not give to
the Prophets before him, thus glorifying him over them.
In Qawāwīn al-Ishrāq ilā kulli al-╖ūfiyya fī Jamī’i al-Āfāq,
he (al-Tūnisī) also said:
Do not say, “The approaching End of Time necessitates the
departure of the people of spiritual distinction,” but say, “By
Allah, they are in these times like treasure in the owner’s vault.”
There is no harm for me if I do not come before,
The One who owns the arena is aware (of my place).

10. Abū al-Mawāhib al-Tūnisī (d. 1477) was a renowned scholar of Tunisia
and saint of Shādhiliyya Sufi path. His major work was Qawanīn Hikam alIshrāq, which has been translated into English by Edward Jurji as Illumination
in Islamic Mysticism (Princeton Oriental Texts, 1938).
214 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Even if the garden of eloquence should become a wasteland
The Lord still has treasure in the depths of the vault.
Someone who comes at the end of the cycles of existence will
not suffer deprivation, so long as his knowledge distinguishes
him among the most excellent of his peers. Allah deferred the
coming of the Prophet (Mu╕ammad) ! but put him first in
degree of praise and mention.
Majd al-Dīn said in the preface of al-Qāmūs:11
I say, as the speaker of truth, Abū al-‘Abbās al-Mubarrad,12 said
in his book, al-Kāmil, “The interlocutor should not be given
preference because he comes from an ancient time, nor should
the righteous person be treated unfairly because he is a
contemporary. Each should be awarded his rightful due.”
According to the agreeable gnostic sage (al-‘ārif almurta╓a), Shaykh Murta╓a,13 in his commentary entitled Tāj al-
‘Arūs: “The point is that neither the remoteness of time nor its
recentness has superior merit in itself. All times are on equal
footing. Of sole importance are the distinguished folk who
exist in those times.” Imam Ibn Mālik said in the preface of alTas-hīl:14

11. Al-Qāmūs al-Mu╕īt (“The Comprehensive Dictionary”), by Abū al-Tahir
b. Ibrahim Majd al-Din al-Fayruz Abadi, an expert of Arabic lexicon and
Maliki jurisprudence. Born in Shiraz (Persia), he served as a judge in Yemen
and eventually settled in Mecca, where he died in 1414.
12. Abū al-‘Abbās Mu╕ammad b. Yazīd (known as Mubarrad) was an early
Arabic grammarian. Originally from Azerbaijan, he settled in Baghdad
during the Abbasid Caliphate and died in 898. Al-Kāmil was his major work
on Arabic grammar.
13. Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-Husayni, known as Murta╓a al-Zabīdi (originally
from India, d. 1790, Egypt) was one of his time’s most famous ╔adīth
scholars, Hanafi jurists, and lexicographer. Tāj al-‘Arūs min Jawāhir al-Qāmūs
is considered one of the largest Arabic dictionaries, originally meant as a
commentary on al-Qāmūs al-Mu╕īt.
14. The Tas-hīl al-Fawā’id wa Takmīl al-Maqāsid, a work on Arabic syntax, was
authored by the Andalusian Jamal al-Din Mu╕ammad al-Jayani, known as
Introduction: On Spiritual Training and Saintly Authority 215
Since the Islamic sciences are Divine bounties and precious gifts,
it is possible that what was difficult for past men to obtain is
kept in store for people of the present. The point is that neither
the remoteness of time nor its recentness has superior merit in
itself. All times are on equal footing. Of sole importance are the
distinguished folk who exist in those times. One who is correct
in his opinion or critique is not impaired by the recentness of the
time in which Allah brought him into being. The erroneous
person, wrong in his opinion and wrong in his understanding,
gains no advantage by the ancientness of his time. Being a
present contemporary, as has been said before, is only a veil.
Pure following of convention (taqlīd) is a curse and torment for
its adherent. Our refined Shaykh, the muezzin, ‘Abd-Allah b.
‘Abd-Allah b. Salāma recited to us these poetic verses:
Tell the one who thinks nothing of the present age,
And sees all preeminence owned by the ancients:
“That person of the past was once a contemporary,
And this contemporary person one day will be considered
one of the ancients.”
He also recited to me these verses by Ibn Rashīq:15
Those most bent on extolling the ancients
And belittling the blameless newcomer
Are motivated only by envy for the modest
So they have climbed high on rotten bones.
The intention in all of this is to encourage people to look
fairly at their contemporaries, and all people. Sincerity and
fairness are the goal of knowledge.

Ibn Malik (d. 1274, Damascus). Ibn Malik is more famous for another of his
works on grammar, Alfiyya. Ibn Aqil (d. 1374) would later produce an
important commentary on this work, al-Musā’id.
15. Ibn Rashīq was an Andalusian scholar (d. 1064) who authored a major
study of Arabic poetry, al-‘Umda fi Mahāsin al-Shi’r wa Adabihi wa Naqdihi.
216 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
The following passage is from the book, Nawādir al-U╗ūl,
section 122, by the wise Imam al-Tirmidhī:16
Concerning the assertion that the best of this (Muslim)
community is its first and its last, and in the middle there is
confusion; consider the Prophetic tradition related by Ibn ‘Umar:
! “My community is like the rain. There is no knowing whether
the first of its members are the best, or the last of them.”17 ‘Abd
al-Ra╕mān b. Samura ! relates:18 “Khālid b. al-Walīd sent me to
bring news to Allah’s Messenger ! during (the battle of) Mu’ta.
When I entered his presence, I said, “O Messenger of Allah!” and
he said,
Take it easy, O ‘Abd al-Ra╕mān. Zayd b. ╔āritha took the
battle standard, and fought until he was killed. May Allah
have mercy on Zayd. Then Ja’far took the standard, and
Ja’far fought until he was killed. May Allah have mercy on
him. Then ‘Abd-Allah b. Rawā╕a took the standard and
fought until he was killed. May Allah have mercy on ‘AbdAllah. Then Khālid took the standard, and victory was
granted to Khālid, for Khālid is a sword among the swords
of Allah the Most High.
The companions of Allah’s Messenger ! wept as they were
gathered around him, so he said, “What is causing you to
weep?” They replied, “How can we not weep, since the best,
noblest and most meritorious of us have been killed?” He said:
Do not weep, for the likeness of my community is the
likeness of a garden cultivated by its owner. He dug its
wells, set up its dwellings and pruned its date-palms. One

16. Nawādir al-Usūl fi ma’rifat ahādīth al-Rasūl, a work examining Prophetic
traditions, was written by Mu╕ammad b. ‘Alī al-╔akīm al-Tirmidhī (d. 910,
Khorasan, Persia), a jurist, ╔adīth scholar (though he is not the same
Tirmidhī who collected one of the six canonical Sunan), and influential early
Sufi.
17. ╔adīth reported in the Sunan of al-Tirmidhī, in the Musnad of Imam
A╕mad; and cited by al-Suyū╙ī in al-Hawi ‘ala al-Fatawi.
18. The narration is found al-Bayhaqi’s Sunan al-Kubra.
Introduction: On Spiritual Training and Saintly Authority 217
year the garden nourished one group of people, and another
year it nourished another group. Perhaps its last fruits will
be the finest bunches of dates. By Him Who sent me as a
Prophet with the Truth, (Jesus) the son of Mary surely will
find in my community a substitute for his apostles.
In another narration, the Prophet ! said:
Among this community (Jesus) the Messiah will surely
notice certain groups of people who are either just like you,
or three times better than you. Surely Allah will not disgrace
a community in which I am the first of its members and
Jesus is the last.
Abū ‘Abd-Allah al-╔akīm19 once said:
Allah has blessed this community, for He has said, “You are the
best community that has ever been brought forth for the sake of
mankind” (Qur’ān, 3:110). He also said, “And thus We have
made you a moderate community” (2:143). This is to say (we are)
a balanced community, not leaning toward excess or deficiency,
for the scale’s balance point is in the middle, steadying the two
extremes, and two scale-pans remain even. So the measurement
begins. You put the ends of this community in each of the two
weighing pans, and they balance. This is because they both
guide to the Truth and by it establish justice. What is between
them is a group idle in the balance, standing upright for the
steadying of the scale-pans. If the middle should incline to either
side, it will return to the reliable sources. The steadiness of the
two scale-pans prevails over any deviation in the middle.
According to one narration: “Knowledge will become manifest
at the End of Time, and people will dedicate themselves to

19. This is likely Abū ‘Abd-Allah Mu╕ammad al-╔akīm al-Nishaburi (d.
1012), the famous ╔adīth scholar of Khorasan who was the teacher of Imam
al-Bayhaqi. His most famous works were al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-╖a╕ī╕ayn and
Mustadrak al-╔akīm.
218 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Allah’s commandment, Exalted is He, so that Allah’s proof for
His servants may be perfected.”
Concerning Disagreement among Sufis
Know that the disagreement between the Sufis does not
detract from them. According to the author of Rū╕ al-Bayān:
There is a discordant party in this community which loathes the
scholars and regards the jurists with hostility. This was far from
the case among the religious communities that preceded us, for
they were obedient and friendly to their religious authorities.
Allah the Exalted says (of the Jews and Christians): “They took
their rabbis and monks as lords apart from Allah” (Qur’ān, 9:31).
If the jurist (fāqih) is detested by the people, what do you think is
the case for the scholar knowledgeable of Allah (al-‘ālim bi-Llah)?
When they find a man with perfect knowledge of the external
and esoteric sciences, who is unique in knowledge, who is
distinguished of his kind and superior to his peers, some of them
surely will say, “He is an atheist (zindīq)!” Others will say, “He is
a heretical innovator (mubtadi’)! Seldom will you hear them
saying, “He is a most truthful one.” So consider the jealous
concern (ghayra) of Allah. Allah has shielded such a scholar from
others, and concealed his secret from the evil-doers.
According to the noble Shaykh Ruwaym,20 “The Sufis will
always benefit from their disagreement, for if they agree, they
will perish. If they accepted each other, they would become
attached to each another, and come to rely (sakana) on each other.
Among the spiritual elite, reliance on anything other than Allah
is comparable to the worship of idols among the common folk.
This disagreement between the spiritually-realized Sufis is not
like the disagreement among the Jews and the Christians. The
disagreement of the Sufis concerns the Truth and is for the sake

20. Ruwaym b. A╕mad al-Baghdadi (d. 915-6, Baghdad) was a master of
jurisprudence (of the Zahiri school), Qur’ān recitation and Sufism.
Introduction: On Spiritual Training and Saintly Authority 219
of Truth. The disagreement of others concerns falsehood and is
for the sake of falsehood.”
The gist of the matter is that disagreement can be both
blameworthy and praiseworthy. The blameworthy disagreement
relates to the beliefs and principles of the religion. That which is
praiseworthy relates to various courses of action (‘amāl) or the
branches of the religion. The Prophet ! meant this latter
disagreement when he said, “Scholarly disagreement (ikhtilāf) in
my community is a mercy.”21
A Jewish man once said to ‘Alī, may Allah ennoble his
countenance, “No sooner had you buried your Prophet than you
differed!” ‘Alī replied, “We differed about him (‘anhu), not with
him (fīhi). As for your people, no sooner had your feet become
dry outside the womb than you said to your Prophet, ‘Appoint
for us a god, just as they have gods.’” This is the kind of
response that seizes a person by the throat! “But Allah speaks
the truth, and He shows the way” (Qur’ān, 33:4).
This (notion of permissible disagreement) is confirmed by
what al-Ubayy mentioned in Ikmāl al-Ikmāl.
According to al-Āmidī, the Muslims at the time of the
Prophet’s death ! were in a state of accordance. There was no
disagreement among them, except with regard to matters open
to independent judgment (al-masā’il al-ijtihādiyya), which do not
carry a charge of unbelief. For instance, the Prophet ! said,
“Bring me an inkwell and a sheet of paper, so that I may write
down that which you will never go astray.”22 The companions
disagreed about whether they should bring him what he asked

21. ╔adīth cited by Imam al-‘Ajlūnī in Kashf al-Khafā’ wa Muzīl al-Ilbās. AlHafiz al-Sakhawi also cites the ╔adīth in Maqāsid al-Hasana, who finds it
earlier written in Ibn al-Hajib’s Mukhtasar, who in turn cites al-Khattab’s
Gharib al-╔adīth.
22. ╔adīth reported in the ╖a╕ī╕ of Bukhārī and the Musnad of A╕mad b.
Hanbal.
220 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
for, until ‘Umar said, “Allah’s Messenger ! has been overcome
by pain. The Book of Allah is sufficient for us.”23
Another example of their disagreement occurred when he !
said, “Equip the army of Usāma!” One groups said, “Let us do
it,” and another group said, “Let us wait and see what becomes
of his sickness.” Another example occurred when he ! died, for
the companions disagreed as to whether he died. And ‘Umar
said, “If someone says he has died, I will smite him with my
sword. He simply has been raised up like Jesus!” Another
example was their disagreement about the succession (khilāfa), to
the point where the An╗ār (“Helpers”, those native to Medina)
said, “Let one of us be a commander (amīr) and let one of you be
a commander.” Another example was their disagreement about
the (legislative) council (shūra), until the matter was entrusted to
‘Uthmān. Yet another example was their disagreement about
fighting those who withheld the alms-tax (zakāt). They also
disagreed about the inheritance of distant relatives or of a
grandfather.
Disagreement over matters of independent judgment
continued progressively until the appearance of Mu’abbad,
Ghaylān al-Dimashqī and Yūnus al-Aswārī. They maintained
that there is no predestination (qadar). This was the first
difference of opinion to emerge in relation to the principles of
faith (i’tiqādāt). Difference of opinion then continued to diverge,
until the people of Islam became divided into seventy-three
sects, just as the Prophet ! had predicted in his saying, “The
Jews became separated into seventy-one sects, the Christians
became separated into seventy-two sects, and my community
will become separated into seventy-three sects. All of them will
be doomed to the Fire except one.” His companions asked him,
“Which one is that?” He replied, “The one which I and my

23. Narration related in the ╖a╕ī╕ of Muslim.
Introduction: On Spiritual Training and Saintly Authority 221
companions belong.”24 So this (prediction) was one of his
Prophetic miracles.
In al-Jāmi’, Shaykh A╕mad Tijānī is recorded as saying (in
reference to the Prophet’s request for pen and paper on his
deathbed): “What he ! intended to set down in writing was
the unity of gnostic sages (‘ārifīn), for that is a clear
distinguishing factor. And Allah is the best of knowers.”
The Shar╕ al-Arba’īn al-Nawawiyya of the jurist ‘Alī b. alSultān Mu╕ammad al-╔anafī25 lists seven sources of heretical
innovation.
(1) The Mu’tazila (“Separatists”) maintain that Allah’s servants are
the creators of their own deeds. They deny the vision of the
Creator, Glorious and Exalted is He. They consist of twenty
sects.
(2) The Shī’a (“Partisans” of ‘Alī) are extravagant in their love for
‘Alī !. They consist of twenty-two sects.
(3) The Murji’a (“Procrastinators”) maintain that sinful disobedience
is harmless if combined with faith, just as obedience is useless
when combined with disbelief.
(4) The Khawārij (“Rebels”) have detached themselves through their
hatred of ‘Alī !, charging him with unbelief as they charge
anybody they consider to have committed a major sin. They
consist of twenty sects.
(5) The Najjāriyya (followers of Muhammd al-Najjār) agree with the
people of the Sunnah regarding the creation of deeds, but with
the Mu’tazila regarding the denial of Divine Attributes and the
denial of Divine Speech. They consist of three sects.

24. ╔adīth related in the Sunan of Abū Dāwūd and the Sunan of Ibn Mājah.
25. This is likely ‘Alī b. Sultan Mu╕ammad al-Qāri (d. 1605, Mecca), a great
Hanafi jurist and ╔adīth scholar originally from Herat (Persia). He was a
student of A╕mad b. Hajar Haythami. The work in question is a
commentary on the “Forty ╔adīth” collection of Imam Nawawi (d. 1277).
222 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
(6) The Jabariyya (“Compulsionists”) maintain that the servant of
Allah is deprived of free-will. They form a single sect.
(7) The Mushabbiha (“Assimilators”) maintain that the Real is
similar to the creatures in physical shape and incarnation
(╕ulūl). They also form a single sect. These are the seventytwo sects doomed to the Fire of Hell. The sect that is saved
from damnation is comprised of those who follow the pure
Sunnah.
The authority of the Sufi shaykhs
Rū╕ al-Bayān contains the following commentary on the verse,
“O you who believe, obey Allah and obey the Messenger, and
those in authority (amr) among you” (Qur’ān, 4:59):
Know that the words “those in authority” actually refers to the
consummate religious leaders (al-mashāyikh al-wā╗ilūn) and those
in whose hand is the authority for spiritual training (amr altarbiya). The one in charge of the disciple is the shaykh.
Whenever a mystical experience (wārid) knocks at the door of the
disciple’s heart, or he receives a directive (from the Unseen), or
an inspiration, or something happens that conveys information
about actions or spiritual states that concern him, he should
submit the matter to the shaykh for scrutiny. The shaykh will
consider what benefits it may contain, and either will encourage
him or restrain him. Because he is the one in authority, the
disciple must obey his commands and his prohibitions. As for
the shaykh, his authorities are the Qur’ān and the Sunnah.
Whenever he receives truthful insights (wārid al-╕aqq) from the
Unseen, in the form of unveilings, visions, (revelations of) secrets
and realities, he should put them to the test of the Qur’ān and
Sunnah. If they confirm his experiences, he accepts them; but if
not, he leaves them. This is because the spiritual path (╙arīqa) is
Introduction: On Spiritual Training and Saintly Authority 223
determined by the Qur’ān and Sunnah, as was mentioned by the
perfect Shaykh Najm al-Dīn al-Kubra in Ta’wīlāt.
26
The wicked scholars (‘ulamā’ al-sū’), slaves of lustful
desires, are not what is meant by this (reference to those in
authority), for they are an evil scourge beneath Heaven.
Concerning the verse, “Say, ‘O People of the Book, why do
you bar those who believe from Allah’s way?’” (Qur’ān, 3:99),
the author of Rū╕ al-Bayān said:
While this is addressed explicitly to the People of the Book, you
should know that it refers implicitly to the wicked scholars. They
sell the religion for the price of this world and do not put their
knowledge into practice. They disbelieve in what comes in the
Qur’ān in regards to abstinence (zuhd) from the world, piety
(war’), fear (taqwa), restraining the self from lustful desires,
preferring what is lasting to what is passing, shunning the
creation while turning to the Real, and making effort to attain
the objective.
Allah witnesses what they do, observing their intentions in
good deeds and bad. He surely will requite them for what they
do. By their greed for this world and their pursuit of lustful
desires, they mislead the believers who follow them with good
intent, believing their actions are based on the Sacred Law
(sharī’a) and the spiritual path (╙arīqa). Such scholars divert
people from the way of Allah and the path of truth, the path to
which He has commanded His Prophets to summon their fellow
beings. They try to circumvent the path of truth with the path of
falsehood. Allah has advised the believers, saying, “O you who
believe, obey Allah and obey the Messenger, and those in
authority among you.” This is so the believers will not desert the

26. Najm al-Dīn al-Kubra (d. 1221, Eastern Persia) was a famous Sufi shaykh,
known as “the sculptor of saints.” The Kubrawiyya Sufi order traces its
lineage through him. The work mentioned here is not one of his more wellknown works, but it likely contains his interpretation (ta’wīl) of the Qur’ān.
224 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
path of right guidance after having believed by following bad
conduct and lustful desires. He also said, “And do not follow the
vain desires of a people who erred of old, who led many astray
and were (themselves) led astray from the plain road” (Qur’ān,
5:77).
One of the shaykhs has said that the best knowledge is that
accompanied by fear (khashya), for fear comes only from
knowledge of the Real’s Attributes. Fear is the evidence of real
knowledge, the type one wishes Allah to bestow. The evidence
of fear is compliance with the commandment. Consider the
knowledge that is accompanied by desire for this world,
adulation of its rulers, ambitious pursuit of wealth,
accumulation and hoarding, boastful pride, greed, far-reaching
expectations and forgetfulness of the Hereafter. The one with
this type of knowledge is very far indeed from being included
among the inheritors of the Prophets.27 How can something be
passed to an inheritor if doing so would compromise the quality
it had with its original possessor? The scholar with the above
description is like a candle that, as it casts light for others,
immolates itself. Allah’s Messenger ! said:
There will come upon the people a time when nothing is left
of Islam except its name, and nothing of the Qur’ān except
its transcription. Their hearts will be ruins of right guidance,
and their mosques will be filled with their bodies. Wicked
will those of their scholars beneath heaven that day. Trouble
will issue from them, and to them will it return.28

27. This is a reference to the famous ╔adīth, “The scholars are the heirs of
the Prophets; and the Prophets did not leave behind dinars or dirhams, only
knowledge. So whoever acquires knowledge has acquired an abundant
portion” (in the Sunan of Abū Dāwūd).
28. Cited by Imam ‘Alā al-Dīn al-Hindi in Kanz al-‘Ummāl fi Sunan al-Aqwāl
wa al-Af’āl.
Introduction: On Spiritual Training and Saintly Authority 225
It is reported that Fudayl b. ‘Iyā╓29 once said: “We have
heard that the Day of Resurrection will begin with
(recompensing) the profligates among the scholars and the
bearers of the Qur’ān, before the idol worshipers.” An intelligent
person should not be deceived by their outward appearance, but
should observe the weakness of their conviction and the
depravity of their condition and all its implications. The
intelligent man should avoid those who conduct themselves in
this manner. He must follow the way of the best of examples,
take refuge with Allah through detaching himself from
everything other than Him, and persist in the genuine
affirmation of Divine Oneness. Like this, he will be guided to the
straight path. If someone dedicates himself to Him through selfextinction (fanā’) in Divine Oneness, his path is the path of Allah.
No one can bar him from it. Nothing can harm him, and the
cunning and wickedness of his enemy cannot lead him astray.
Whoever is with Allah, Allah is with him. He becomes his
Guardian and Helper.
Such dedication is not within the means of the spiritual
seekers, but Allah the Exalted may take His servant by the hand
and lead him to his goal. If the servant’s quest is genuine, he
certainly will not be deprived of the answer (to his prayers). If
someone seeks and strives with earnest endeavor, he will find. If
someone knocks on a door, and keeps knocking, he will enter.
May Allah protect us and you from the cunning of Satan and the
trickery of a lower self inciting to evil (al-nafs al-ammāra bi al-sū’)
In reference to the verse, “And let there arise from you a
community that summons to goodness, enjoining what is
right, and forbidding what is wrong; such are they who are

29. Imam Fudayl b. Iyad (d. 803) was an Islamic scholar and Sufi in the Hijaz
known for his sincerity. He authored the Hikyat al-Naqshiyya and was one of
the teachers of the ‘Abbasid Sultan Harūn al-Rashīd.
226 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
successful” (Qur’ān 3:104), the author of Rū╕ al-Bayān also
said:
The verse implies that the members of this community summon
to goodness by their deeds, not their words. This is the way they
command what is right and forbid what is wrong, and they are
the successful ones. So this is a warning to those who command
what is right but do not do it themselves. Such is indicated in the
report of Usama, who once heard Allah’s Messenger ! say:
A man will be brought forth on the Day of Resurrection. He
will be thrown into the Fire, so his intestines will spill into
the Fire and he will circle around in it, just as the donkey
circles around in its mill. The inhabitants of the Fire will
gather around him and say, “O so-and-so, what is the matter
with you? Were you not the one who used to command us to
do the right, and forbid us to do the wrong?” To this he will
reply, “I used to command you, but I did not do it myself.”
Those who summon to goodness in reality are the shaykhs
of the spiritual path, for if someone does not know Allah, he
does not know what is good. Absolute goodness is the absolute
perfection realized by the human being in accordance with the
degree of his knowledge (ma’rifa) of the Real and arrival (wu╗ūl)
to Him. And this was the perfect goodness that belonged to the
Prophet !. Perfection cannot be attained by something
ephemeral, so the people should be summoned to Real Himself,
or to the means to arriving to Him. This is the goodness to
summon people. The right (to be commanded) is everything that
draws one near to the Real. The wrong is everything that keeps
one far from Him.
Whoever is not endowed with (the reality of) Divine
Oneness (taw╕īd) and resolute dedication (istiqāma), he does not
have the authority to summon (maqām al-da’wa). He who is not
resolutely dedicated, even if he affirms Divine Oneness, will
sometimes command the right, but it may be wrong in actuality,
and sometimes forbid the wrong, but it may be right in actuality.
Introduction: On Spiritual Training and Saintly Authority 227
(In his lack of authority to summon to Allah) he is like one who
reaches the station of communion (jam’) and is barred from the
creation by the Real. How often these people make permissible
what is forbidden and forbid what is permissible, for they are a
veiled folk. But no veil remains for the people of absolute
success, for they are the deputies (khulafā’) of Allah on His earth.
May Allah bring us to knowledge of the reality of this state (╕āl),
and may He honor us with the arrival to His Exalted Majesty.
According to the Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī:
Our Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-Maghribī al-Shādhilī !30 used to
say: “You must seek the path of the Sufi masters, even if they are
little known, and beware of those who are ignorant of the
spiritual path, even if they are highly renowned. The knowledge
of the Sufi people has been sufficiently honored by what Moses
said to al-Khi╓r:31 ‘Moses said to him, ‘May I follow you, in
order for you to teach me some of the right guidance you have
been taught?’’ (Qur’ān, 18:66). This is the most compelled proof
of the need to seek knowledge of the Divine Reality (al-╔aqīqa),
just as it is necessary to seek knowledge of the Sacred Law (alSharī’a).”
Elsewhere in the Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī, ‘Alī Harāzim writes: “I
have seen a letter sent by Shaykh Mu╕yī al-Dīn b. al-‘Arabī !
to Shaykh Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī, author of al-Tafsīr (al-Kabīr), in
which he explains to him the deficiency of his degree of
knowledge. This in spite of the fact Fakhr al-Dīn was one of
the preeminent scholars in every science.” The letter reads:
Know my brother, may Allah assist us and you with His
enabling grace, that a man does not attain perfection in the

30 . Mu╕ammad al-Maghribi was a fifteenth-century shaykh of the
Shadhiliyya order who conferred the Shadhiliyya on Jalāl al-Dīn al-Suyū╙ī,
among others.
31. Al-Khi╓r is the name given for the mystical guide of Moses mentioned in
the Qur’ān.
228 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
station of knowledge until he receives his knowledge directly
from Allah the Exalted without any intermediary, such as the
transmitted report of a shaykh. If one’s knowledge comes only
from transmitted reports, one becomes obsessed with the study
of temporal phenomenon (mu╕adīthāt). This is well known by the
people of Allah. If someone devotes his life to the study of
temporal phenomenon and their detailed classification, this
becomes his allotment with his Lord, Almighty and Glorious is
He. Such a person becomes completely engrossed in temporal
phenomenon and fails to realize their reality.
O my brother, if you traveled (the path) with the help of a
shaykh from among the people of Allah, you would be led to the
presence of witnessing the Real. You would learn from Him
knowledge of affairs through genuine inspiration, without
difficulty, fatigue or sleeplessness, just as al-Khi╓r learned it.
There is no true knowledge except that which comes from
unveiling (kashf) and witnessing (shuhūd), rather than
speculation, thinking, supposition and conjecture. The perfect
Shaykh Abū Yazīd al-Bistāmī ! used to say to the scholars of his
era: “You have taken your knowledge from the scholars of the
written texts, like a dead man from a dead man. But we have
received our knowledge from the Ever-Living who never dies.”
O my brother, it is incumbent on you to refrain from seeking
any of the sciences except those by which your essential nature
will be perfected, and which will travel with you wherever you
go. This is only the knowledge of Allah (al-‘ilm bi-Llah) the
Exalted, whenever it is bestowed or witnessed. As for your
knowledge of medicine, for example, you need it only for the
world of sickness and disease. If you moved to a world in which
there is no sickness and no disease, whom would you treat with
that knowledge?
So you have come to know, my brother, that it is
unnecessary for the intelligent person to acquire anything of the
sciences except that which will travel with him between worlds
Introduction: On Spiritual Training and Saintly Authority 229
(barzakh). Otherwise (leave the sciences that) will part with you
at the time of your move to the world of the Hereafter. Only two
forms of knowledge travels with a man to the Hereafter. The first
is the knowledge of Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He. The
second is the knowledge of the regions (mawā╙in) of the
Hereafter, so he will not fail to recognize the manifestations that
occur to him there. This is so he will not say to the Real when He
manifests Himself to him, “We take refuge with Allah from
you!” Therefore, my brother, you must discover these two forms
of knowledge in this abode so you may reap the benefits of them
in the next abode. You should refrain from carrying around
anything from the sciences of this abode, except that for which
there is a pressing need in your journey to Allah the Almighty
and Glorious. And this is according to the consensus of the
people of Allah the Exalted.
The two desired forms of knowledge can be discovered only
by means of secluded retreat (khalwa), spiritual discipline (riyā╓a)
and effort (mujāhada), and rapture (jadhb) in the Divine. I was
intending to describe for you the secluded retreat and its
prerequisites, and what will appear to you during it – one thing
and the next in its proper sequence – but shortage of time has
prevented me from that.
The habitual practice of one with no interest in the secrets of
the Sacred Law is disputation. So they have refuted everything
of which they were ignorant. They have become addicted to
fanaticism and the love of appearance and leadership. They use
the religion to eat of the world, instead of yielding to the people
of Allah and submitting to them.

231
APPENDIX I
Concerning the Sufi Path
n La╙ā’if al-Minan, al-Sha’rānī said: “The path of the Sufi
people (╙arīq al-qawm) always has been a rarity, in every
age. Few have had the stamina to endure their shaykh’s
training (tarbiya) and his examination of their actions.” That is
why the Shaykh began to see the Mu╕ammadan virtues, such
as piety, abstinence, fear of Allah the Most High, and so on, as
being in the hands of the people of Allah. It is impossible to
obtain such characteristics by random means. The path of the
Sufi people thus consists entirely of battling against the lower
self (mujāhadat li-l-nafs). But where is the one who is capable of
virtuous conduct and dedicated opposition to the lower self,
preferring the desire of the Real to the self’s desire? This can
only be attained by sacrificing the soul (badhl al-rūh). We know
that the true Sufis were the Imams of independent scholarly
judgment (mujtahidī) and the scholars who put their
knowledge into practice.
Suppose someone said: “If the way of Sufism had been a
matter prescribed by the Sacred Law, the Imams of
independent scholarly judgment would have produced books
I
232 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
about it. But we do not see any book of theirs on that subject,
none whatsoever.” Our response would be: The fact that these
Imams did not produce a single book on this subject simply
was due to the paucity of maladies among the people of their
era, and their general immunity from ostentation and
hypocrisy. Even if such immunity did not extend to all the
people of their time, the exceptions were very few, and any
shortcoming of theirs was hardly apparent. That being the
case, the main concern of the scholars of independent
judgment was the dispersal of all the legal proofs to the cities
and frontier regions. This was similarly the case with the
leaders among the generation succeeding (the companions of
the Prophet), as well as their successors. Those proofs (which
they furnished) are the subject matter of every science, and the
principles of all rules of law are known by them. That was
more important, therefore, than criticizing some people with
regard to the movement of their hearts, which does not
comprise the ritual practice of the religion. No intelligent
person would ever say about Imam ╔anīfa, for instance, or
Imam Mālik or Imam al-Shāfi’ī or Imam A╕mad (ibn ╔anbal),
may Allah be pleased with them all, that any one of them knew
himself to be guilty of ostentation, vanity, arrogance, envy, or
hypocrisy, but did not do battle with his lower self and subject
it to criticism. If they had been aware of their susceptibility to
these afflictions, they would have given precedence to curing
them over every other science. So understand this well.
Al-Qushayri, may Allah have mercy on him, said: “The
Sufis originally came to be called Sufis when lustful desires
and innovations began to appear, during the time of Imam
A╕mad b. ╔anbal !. The term ‘Sufi’ was then applied
exclusively to anyone who faithfully adhered to the Qur’ān
Concerning the Sufi Path 233
and the Sunnah, and acted according to them.” He also said,
“We have been informed that Imam Abū al-Qāsim al-Junayd
! used to say: ‘This spiritual path (╙arīqa) of ours is based on
the Qur’ān and the Sunnah. If someone does not read the
Qur’ān and write the Prophetic traditions, he is not to be
emulated in this (path).” In the seventy-third chapter of alFutū╕āt, Shaykh Mu╕yī al-Dīn (Ibn al-‘Arabī) said: “Know that
we have no evidence that disproves the method of the Sufis,
and no reproach that refutes it, either from the Sacred Law or
from transmitted report. Those who attack Sufism do so out of
sheer ignorance.” In al-Ibrīz, Ibn al-Mubarak quoted the words
of his Shaykh (al-Dabbāgh):
Hidden knowledge (ilm al-bā╙in) is like ninety-nine lines of
golden writing, while exoteric knowledge is like the final onehundredth line in ordinary ink. Nevertheless, if this line in black
ink were not together with the golden lines, they would not be of
any benefit, and their owner would not be safe.
Ibn Mubarak also reported his Shaykh’s words to him on
another occasion:
Exoteric knowledge is like the torch that shines at night,
providing splendid benefit in the darkness. Hidden knowledge
is like the rising sun and brilliance of the light at high-noon.
Perhaps its owner will say about the torch in his hand, “Allah
has enabled me to dispense with it by the light of the day.” So he
will put it out. At that very moment, however, the light of the
day will depart from him, and he will return to the darkness of
the night. The persistence of his daylight is therefore conditional
on his refraining from extinguishing the torch in his hand.
In al-Jawāhir wa al-Durar,1 al-Sha’rānī said:

1. Al-Sha’rani’s Kitab al-Jawāhir wa al-Durar min-mā istafadu Sayyid ‘Abd alWahhāb al-Sha’rānī min Shaykhihi Sayyidi ‘Alī al-Khawwā╗ is a collection of
teachings of al-Sha’rānī’s Shaykh ‘Alī al-Khawwā╗.
234 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
I once asked our Shaykh (‘Alī al-Khawwā╗) ! about the
statement of some of them, “The combination of two opposites is
inconceivable.” I said, “Is this statement valid in reference to the
gnostic sages of Allah the Almighty and Glorious?” He replied,
“I have heard one of the ecstatics say, ‘The combination of two
opposites in not inconceivable, except for one whose mind is
stuck. As for one whom Allah reinforces with Divine strength,
the judgment of his mind is included (in this strength), so he
does not find this inconceivable.’ It is known that the Real,
Exalted is He, and the world are two opposites, yet they are
joined together without incarnation, without unification or
delimitation. If someone does not combine the two opposites (in
this case), his (knowledge of) Divine Oneness (taw╕īd) is
imperfect. Moreover, he doubts many Prophetic traditions, for
the combination of two opposites is one of the strongest proofs
of Divine Singularity (al-Wa╕dāniyya). This is because if a person
sees himself as a necessary existent being, he has committed
polytheism. On the other hand, the one who is not (seeing
himself as) indispensible to existence, he (realizes himself as)
non-existent and present at the same time.
Know that the combination of opposites is only something
inconceivable to the mind, for (the person affirming Divine
Oneness) sees multiplicity as one, and one as many, at one and
the same time, in one single realization, without interpretation
or alteration. And this occurs while the conditions for
contrariety are fulfilled. The degree of sainthood is other than
what is familiar to the scholars whose judgment is determined
solely by their minds. It should be clear to you, my brother
that, in actuality, the combination of two opposites is
impossible: there is nothing existing except Allah, and He has
no opposite. This subject has once again become similar to the
doctrine of the scholastic theologians, but with a perspective
that is contrary to their point of view. So contemplate this with
careful attention.
Concerning the Sufi Path 235
Consider this passage from Rū╕ al-Bayān:
Know that the spiritual seekers (sālikīn) are of various types. It
takes some of them seventy years to cut through the obstacles
and pierce the veils. It takes others ten years, or one year, or one
month, or even one week, or even one hour. Some of them even
reach their destination in a single instant, by special good
fortune from Allah and His foreordained assistance. Remember
the sorcerers of Pharaoh when they witnessed the miracle of
Moses. They only took one instant to say, “We believe in the
Lord of all the worlds” (Qur’ān, 7:121). They saw the way and
traversed it without hesitation, so they came, moment to
moment – or even less time than that – to be endowed with the
gnosis of Allah.
It is related that Ibrāhīm b. Ad-ham2 used to be involved in
his worldly business, but then turned away from that to embark
on the path to the Truth. His journey had taken him no farther
than the distance from Balkh to Marw al-Rudh, when he saw a
man fall off the bridge over a flooded river. He signaled to him,
“Stop!” The man came to a halt in midair and was saved.
Rābi’a al-‘Adawiyya al-Ba╗riyya was an elderly enslaved
woman who was put up for sale in the market of Ba╗ra, but
nobody wanted her because of her advanced age. One of the
merchants took pity on her, so he bought her for one hundred
dirhams (small silver coins), then promptly emancipated her.
Then she chose to embark on the path of Truth, devoting herself
to worship. Before one year had passed, she was being visited by
the (Qur’ān) readers and scholars of Ba╗ra due to the grandeur of
her status.
The one for whom Divine assistance has not been
foreordained, who has not practiced virtuous conduct, will put

2. Sultan Ibrāhīm b. Ad-ham (d. 777) was the king of the Balkh (Khurasan,
Persia) who abandoned his throne to take up the life of a Sufi ascetic upon
the promptings of several visions, including one of al-Khi╓r, the mystical
guide of Moses.
236 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
all his trust in his lower self. He may well get stuck in a ravine
on the mountain path for seventy years, unable to make his way
across it. How often will he yell and cry, “How dark and rough
is this path! How difficult and problematic is this business!”
If you were to ask, “Why is one singled out for Divine
success, while the other is deprived, although both of them are
partners in the rope of servitude?” The answer to that question
comes from on the Majestic Heights: “You must adhere to
virtuous conduct (adab), and you must know the secret of
Lordship and the reality of servitude, for ‘He will not be
questioned as to what He does, but they will be questioned’
(Qur’ān, 21:23). ‘Such is the judgment and ordering of (Him), the
Mighty, the Wise’ (6:96). ‘All bounty is in Allah’s hand. He
bestows it on whom He wills’ (3:73). ‘Allah is the Lord of infinite
bounty’ (3:74).”
May Allah include us among those for whom assistance is
foreordained, who are destined to receive success and guidance
from Him. Amen, O Lord of all the worlds.
In Ta’sīs al-Qawā’id, Shaykh Zarrūq has said:
Receiving knowledge and practice from the spiritual masters
(mashāyikh) is more perfect than receiving it from others. Allah
the Exalted said, “Nay, here are Signs self-evident in the hearts
of those endowed with knowledge” (Qur’ān, 29:49). And He
said, “And follow the path of the one who has turned to Me”
(31:15). This applies in particular to the spiritual masters. The
companions received it from the Prophet !, who received it
from (the Angel) Gabriel. The Prophet followed his direction to
be a Prophet-servant, rather than a Prophet-king. The generation
succeeding that of the Prophet received from the companions. So
it came to be known by the likes of Ibn Sīrīn and Ibn alMusayyab, or al-A’raj who received from Abū Hurayra; or
╘āwūs, Wahb and Mujāhid, who all received from Ibn ‘Abbās.
What has been mentioned here clearly pertains to receiving both
knowledge and practice.
Concerning the Sufi Path 237
As for acquiring the benefit of devotional zeal (himma) and
spiritual state (╕āl), this is something Anas referred to when he
said, “No sooner had we dusted off our hands from burying him
! than we had already abandoned our hearts.” He clearly meant
that the sight of his noble person was a benefit to their hearts.
The religious scholars are the heirs of the Prophets, in the
present and in the future, even if they have not measured up to
the status (of the Prophets). This is the reason for seeking
nearness to the people of Allah in general. That is why He
commanded keeping fellowship with the righteous, and forbade
companionship with the profligates. So understand this well.
Shaykh al-╖āwī3 said, in his commentary of Allah’s saying,
“And do not hurry with the Qur’ān, before its revelation has
been completed for you” (Qur’ān, 20:114):
In other words, (Allah is telling the Prophet) “You must not be
hasty in reciting what Gabriel has implanted in your heart, until
he recites it to you.” The reason for this instruction is that
Gabriel used to come to the Prophet with the Qur’ān, then draw
close to his body and place the revelation in his heart. Then the
Prophet would wish to make haste and pronounce it. Allah
therefore commanded him not to pronounce it until Gabriel
recited it to him with clear verbal expression. This is the
meaning of the Exalted’s saying, “Do not move your tongue
with it to hasten it. It is for Us to gather it together, and to recite
it. So, when We recite it, follow its recitation. Then it is for Us to
explain it” (Qur’ān, 75:16-19). The wisdom in Allah’s Messenger
! receiving directly from Gabriel is that this becomes an
exemplary custom practiced by his community. His community
therefore is commanded to receive it from the mouths of the
spiritual masters, for a person does not succeed by receiving

3. The work referred to is the Tafsīr al-╖āwī ‘ala al-Jalālayn, thus A╕mad al-
╖āwī’s commentary on the Qur’ān exegesis of Jalal al-Din al-Mahalli and
Jalal al-Din al-Suyū╙ī.
238 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
knowledge of the Qur’ān from lines of writing. The means of his
actual instruction is another secret entirely.
Shaykh Zarrūq also said in Ta’sīs al-Qawā’id:
The spiritual elite are steadfast in their words, their deeds and
their essential beings. Preeminent among them are the masters of
remembrance, since no deed performed by a human being is
more certain to deliver him from Allah’s torment than the
remembrance of Allah.
But Allah has created things that are beneficial only for
certain ends, similar to liquor and drugs, so the general rule of
the law must be observed. In the special case (of remembrances),
however, the state and conduct of the individual evade
assessment from the legal standpoint. This applies both to the
intention and the action. On the subject of such unknown
matters, Mālik, may Allah have mercy on him, asked, “How can
you tell whether they constitute unbelief?”
Speaking for myself, I have seen someone making
(protective) incantations (raqiya) by pronouncing blasphemous
expressions. Allah knows best. Shaykh Zarrūq said later in the
same work:
The Sacred Law is decisively settled on the permissibility of
adopting those remembrances and supplication of which the
meaning is perfectly clear, even if it is not authenticated by a
traditional report. This has been established by Ibn al-‘Arabi in
al-Sirāj, as well as by others. Several Prophetic traditions relate
the effectiveness of the devoted servant’s supplication
proceeding from his spiritual zeal. In the chapter on Prophetic
supplications in the Muwa╙╙a’, Mālik, may Allah have mercy on
him, included the saying reported by Abū al-Dardā’: “The eyes
have gone to sleep and eyelids have calmly relaxed, and nothing
remains but You, O Ever-Living, O Eternally Self-Sustaining.” To
someone who invoked Allah by saying, “I ask You, for You are
Allah, the Unique,” the Prophet ! said, “You have appealed to
Concerning the Sufi Path 239
Allah by invoking His Greatest Name.”4 He said the same to
someone who supplicated, “O Ever-Loving, O Lord of the
Splendid Throne,” and to others (who made other
supplications).
This proves the correctness of accepting every supplication
of clear meaning, and which is commendable in its nature. This
is especially the case when it is based on a valid source, like the
dream of a righteous person, and when the merit of the
inspiration has been established; as in the case of the orisons
(a╕zab) al-Shādhilī, al-Nawawī, and others like them. As for the
orisons of Ibn Sab’īn,5 there are many obscure and dubious
elements of them. It is necessary to shun them altogether due to
the risk involved, except if the scholar considers the meaning
and does not take them at face value. The liturgical offices
(wa╛ā’if) compiled from the Prophetic traditions are more
perfect, however, especially when they are received from the
spiritual masters, since nothing is added to them apart from the
compilation. The orisons of al-Shādhilī have passed the test of
detailed analysis and complete examination by scholars wellversed in the Prophetic traditions. This includes what these
orisons contain by way of reminding and exerting influence over
particular desired affairs. And Allah knows best.


4. ╔adīth reported in the Sunan of Abū Dāwūd, the Sunan of al-Nasā’ī, and
the Musnad of Imam A╕mad b. Hanbal.
5. Mu╕ammad b. ‘Abd al-╔aqq b. Sab’īn (d. 1268, Andalusia, Morocco,
Mecca) was a renowned Sufi who taught of the unity of creation.
240
APPENDIX II
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies
he litany (wird) of the Tijānī Spiritual Path consists of
the following elements: 1) the plea for forgiveness, 2)
the invocation of blessing upon the Chosen Prophet, 3)
the remembrance that there is no god but Allah, 4) the
recitation of certain verses of the Qur’ān. Its excellence exceeds
other litanies, for our master (Shaykh Tijānī), according to his
own account, received it by word of mouth from the Prophet.
Shaykh Tijānī is an honest man, and the account of the honest
man must be accepted. In this case especially, evidence
proving his truthfulness is apparent to anyone whose
perception has been enlightened by Allah.
Taking refuge in Allah
Our litany begins with the plea for refuge, made by saying, “I
take refuge with Allah from Satan the accursed.” As we are
told in Rū╕ al-Bayān:
Know that the meaning of seeking refuge is asking permission to
enter (the Divine Presence), knocking at the door. When a person
comes to the door of one of the kings, he cannot enter without
T
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 241
the king’s permission. In the same way, when someone intends
to recite the Qur’ān, he is actually seeking to enter into intimate
conversation with the Beloved. So he needs to purify his tongue
by seeking refuge, because it has been soiled by gossip and
slander. Some of the masters of gnosis have said: “This statement
is means of access for those who draw near (to the Lord), the
safeguard of the fearful, the reformation of the criminals, the
rescue of those doomed to perdition, and the good cheer of the
lovers.” It entails compliance with the saying of the Lord of all
the worlds in the (Qur’ānic) Chapter of the Bee: “If you recited
the Qur’ān, you must seek refuge with Allah from Satan the
accursed” (16:98). This means that the plea for refuge must
precede the recitation, according to the vast majority of Muslims.
There are others who say, “The main clause of the conditional
sentence (involved in this verse) comes after the condition, so the
plea for refuge must be postponed (until after the recitation).” In
our opinion, however, the meaning is, “If you intend to perform
the recitation (seek refuge),” and this is a widely accepted
interpretation, compatible with conventional linguistic usage.
As for the wording of the plea for refuge, the preferred
formulation is that of the majority, namely: “I take refuge with
Allah from Satan the accursed.” Such has been authenticated by
the Prophetic tradition (which goes on to say), “This is how
Gabriel taught me to recite it, on the authority of the inscription
on the Well-Preserved Tablet (al-Law╕ al-Ma╕fū╛).”
After further discussion, the author said:
Know that the words of the plea for refuge are of three kinds: 1)
relating to the attributes of Allah, 2) relating to the actions of
Allah, 3) relating to the Essence of Allah. All of these types are
referred to when the Prophet ! supplicated, “I take refuge with
Your good pleasure from Your disapproval, and with Your
exemption from Your punishment, and with You from You.”1

1. Prophetic supplication reported by Imam al-Tirmidhī, by al-Nasā’I in his
Sunan, and by Imam A╕mad b. Hanbal in his Musnad.
242 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Allah’s comprehensive, majestic Name is preferred (in the
supplication), so that the form in which the plea for refuge is
expressed will incorporate these three types.
In al-Tafsīr al-Kabīr (Fakhr al-Dīn al-Rāzī) said:
Evils stem either from the false doctrines, including those of the
seventy-two misguided sects, or from physical acts. Some (of
these actions) – those that nullify religious duties and their
correct performance – harm the religion, like the excuse of
(religious duties) being impractical (muta’adhdhir). Some of them
are not harmful to the religion, like diseases, aches and pains,
burning, drowning, poverty, blindness, chronic illness, and other
such tribulations and afflictions. The declaration, “I take refuge
with Allah,” comprises the plea for refuge from all of these evils
of doctrine and action. So the intelligent person, when he makes
the plea for refuge, should envision these different types of evil
and their various forms. When he realizes that they are without
limit, he will acknowledge his inability to repel them, so his
mind will prompt him to say, “I take refuge with Allah, He Who
is Capable of dealing with all problems, all dangers and all
disasters.”
It is said that all knowledge is contained in the four
(previous) Books (of revelation), and that all of this knowledge is
contained in the Qur’ān. All knowledge in the Qur’ān is
contained in its opening chapter (al-Fāti╕a). All of al-Fāti╕a is
contained in (its first line), “In the Name of Allah, the
Compassionate, the Merciful” (basmala). All of the basmala is
contained in its first letter, bā’, as Allah the Exalted wills.2
Later on in al-Tafsīr al-Kabīr, the author said:
The reason for this is that the purpose of all knowledge is to
allow the servant to attain to the Lord. The bā’ that is linked to

2. In the context at hand, this is meant to the letter bā’ in the plea for refuge,
a’ūdhu bi-Llah
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 243
Allah3 links the servant to Him. So he will discover the secrets of
the bā’ in the basmala, if Allah the Exalted wills.
After a lengthy discussion, the author then said:
The real meaning of the plea for refuge is said to be beyond
verbal utterance. Its discovery is impossible without presence of
heart and harmony between speech, spiritual state and action. It
is useless for your tongue to say, “I take refuge with Allah,”
while your spiritual state and actions are saying, “I take refuge
with Satan.” This latter would be due to the lower self’s
partnership with Satan while committing sinful acts of
disobedience and rebellion. The gnostic’s plea is for refuge from
the recognition of anything other than Allah, and from the veil of
multiplicity, for surely Satan flees from the light of spiritual
understandings (ma’ārif).
It is related that Abū Sa’īd al-Kharrāz, may Allah sanctify his
innermost being, once saw Iblīs in a dream, so he threatened to
strike him with his staff. But Iblīs said, “O Abū Sa’īd, I am not
afraid of the staff. I am only afraid of the rays of the sun of
gnosis when it rises in the firmament of the gnostic’s heart.”
To those who say, “Pleading for refuge from Satan implies
the fear of something other than Allah, and falls short of true
worship,” our response will be: “Treating the enemy as an
enemy is a confirmation of love. It is fleeing to Allah from
everything other than Allah, as a means of perfecting true
worship and complying with Allah’s commandment. The fear of
someone who does not fear Allah is a display of wretchedness,
as if he is saying, “I am afraid of Allah, but only from His
punishment and anger. I am afraid of him of who fears Allah,
but only from the injurious effect of his supplication. I am afraid
of him who does not fear Allah, but only from the evil effect of
his actions.”

3. The bā’ in “a’ūdhu bi-Llah” or “bismi-Llah” has the meaning of “with”
(Allah) or “in” (the Name of Allah).
244 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
After further discussion, the author continues:
When the Prophet ! was asked about the whispering of Satan,
he replied, “The thief does not enter a house that has nothing in
it!” Thus Satan’s whispering is motivated by the presence of true
belief. ‘Alī b. Abī ╘ālib ! said, “The difference between our
prayer and the prayer of the People of the Book (Jews and
Christians) is the whispering of Satan. He has finished dealing
with the unbelievers, since they have concurred with him,
whereas the believers oppose and fight him; so with combat
comes opposition.”
It is related that a man set out from his native Khurasan in
the direction of Iraq. When he arrived in Iraq, he frequented one
of the scholars, until he was taught four thousand counsels
(╕adīth) of wisdom. Then, when he wished to leave for his
homeland, he sought permission from his teacher. The teacher
said to him, “Shall I give you a word of advice that is worth
more than all of your counsels?” He said, “What is it?” The
teacher asked, “Will Iblīs be in Khurasan?” He said, “Yes.” So
the teacher asked, “Will he tempt you?” He said, “Yes.” So the
teacher asked, “How will you deal with his temptation?” He
said, “We shall reject him.” The teacher asked, “What if he
tempts you again?” He said, “We shall reject him again.” The
teacher then said, “When the enemy of Allah annoys you, and
distracts you from worshipful obedience, you must not become
preoccupied with rejecting his temptation. Be with him like a
stranger with the shepherd’s dog. You must seek refuge with
Allah, for Satan is a dog from among the dogs.” May Allah keep
us all safe from Satan’s cunning and wickedness.
The real reason for beginning our litany with the plea for
refuge is that Allah has taught us that Satan is an enemy to us,
and He has commanded us to treat him as an enemy. The
Exalted said, “Surely Satan is an enemy to you, so treat him as
an enemy” (Qur’ān, 35:6). Treating the enemy as an enemy
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 245
means remaining constantly on guard against him by taking
protective measures. Once we have appealed for refuge, we
have entered an impregnable fortress, and we are left free to
experience the pleasure and comfort that become available in
the remainder of the litany. Thus the prevention of bad things
clears the way for the obtainment of benefits.
Beginning in the Name of Allah
Next in our litany comes the Basmala, “In the Name of Allah,
the Compassionate, the Merciful,” which is linked to the
Qur’ān’s opening chapter (al-Fāti╕a). According to Rū╕ alBayān:
Allah the Exalted has three thousand Names. He made one
thousand of them known to none but the Angels, and He made
one thousand of them known to none but the Prophets. Three
hundred are in the Torah, three hundred are in the Gospel, three
hundred are in the Psalms, and ninety-nine are in the Qur’ān.
Allah has kept one Name to Himself. The meaning of all these
three thousand Names is contained within these three Names
(Allah, the Compassionate – Ra╕mān, the Merciful – Ra╕īm). If
someone knows them and practices them, it is as if he has
remembered Allah the Exalted by all His Names.4
The Prophet ! is reported as having said: “On the night
when I was transported to heaven, all the Gardens were
displayed to me, and in them I saw four rivers: a river of water, a
river of milk, a river of wine, and a river of honey. So I said, ‘O
Gabriel, from where do these rivers come from, and whither are
they going?’ He said, ‘They are going to the Basin of Abundance
(╔aw╓ al-Kawthar), but I do not know where they come from, so
ask Allah the Exalted to inform you.’” When he asked his Lord,
an Angel came and greeted the Prophet ! and said, “O

4. This saying has also been reported by al-Suyū╙ī in al-Durr al-Manthūr.
246 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Mu╕ammad, close your eyes.” He said, “So I closed my eyes.
Then the Angel said, ‘Open your eyes,’ so I opened my eyes, and
there I found myself beside a tree. I saw a dome of white pearl,
and it had a door of bright gold, with a lock. If all the jinn and
human beings in this world were placed on that dome, they
would be like a bird perched on a mountain. Then I saw these
four rivers emerging from underneath this dome. When I wished
to return, the Angel said to me, ‘Why did you not enter the
dome?’ I said, ‘How can I enter, when there is a lock on its door
for which I have no key?’ The Angel said, ‘Its key is, Bismi-Llah
al-Rahmān al-Rahīm (In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate,
the Merciful).’
“Then, when I approached the lock and said, ‘In the Name of
Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful,’ the lock opened and I
entered into the dome. There I saw these four rivers, flowing
from the four pillars of the dome. Inscribed on the four pillars I
saw, ‘In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful.’ I
saw the river of water flowing from the letter mīm in Bismi-Llah
(In the Name of Allah). I saw the river of milk flowing from the
letter hā’ in Allah, the river of wine flowing from the letter mīm
in al-Ra╕mān (the Compassionate) and the river of honey flowing
from the letter mīm in al-Ra╕īm (the Merciful). I knew then that
the source of these four rivers was the basmala.
“Then Allah the Almighty and Glorious said, ‘O
Mu╕ammad, if someone from your community remembers Me
by these Names, with a heart free from hypocritical ostentation,
and he says, Bismi-Llah al-Ra╕mān al-Ra╕īm, I shall let him drink
from these rivers.’”
According to a Prophetic tradition, “A supplication that
begins with Bismi-Llah al-Ra╕mān al-Ra╕īm, will not be rejected.”
In another tradition, the Prophet ! said: “If someone picks up
from the ground a sheet of paper bearing the inscription, ‘In the
Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful,’ respectfully
preserving Allah’s Name from being soiled, he will be included
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 247
among the most truthful (╗iddīqīn) in the Allah’s sight. Even if his
parents were polytheists, their burden will be lightened because
of him.”5
In La╙ā’if al-Ishārāt, Shaykh A╕mad al-Būnī6 said, “The tree of
existence has branched out from ‘In the Name of Allah, the
Compassionate, the Merciful,’ and the entire universe is based
on it, as a whole and in its individual details. So someone who
remembers it frequently is endowed with dignity in both the
higher and lower worlds. The Roman Emperor wrote to ‘Umar
! saying, ‘I have a headache that will not go away, so send me a
remedy if you have one at your disposal, for the physicians are
incapable of treating it.’ ‘Umar ! responded by sending him a
turban. When the Emperor put it on his head, his headache went
away, and when he took it off, his headache came back. So he
marveled at this. He examined the turban and found it contained
a piece of paper on which was written, ‘In the Name of Allah,
the Compassionate, the Merciful.’”
The Greatest Shaykh (Ibn al-‘Arabi) said in al-Futū╕āt,
“When you recited the opening chapter of the Qur’ān (Fāti╕at alKitāb), you must connect ‘In the Name of Allah, the
Compassionate, the Merciful,’ with a single breath, without
interruption. It is reported on the authority of Mu╕ammad the
Chosen One !, who said he heard it from Gabriel, who said he
heard it from (the Angel) Michael, who said he heard it from (the
Angel) Isrāfīl, that Allah the Exalted said: ‘O Isrāfīl, by My
Might, My Majesty and My Abundance, if someone recites
Bismi-Llah al-Ra╕mān al-Ra╕īm together with the opening chapter

5. This ╔adīth is also reported by Abū Na’īm, and cited by al-Suyū╙ī. It is
also reported by al-Khatīb al-Baghdadi.
6. There seems to be little record of a book by Shaykh al-Būnī (d. 1225,
Maghrib) by this name. The early Sufi al-Qushayri authored a Qur’ān
exegesis by the name, Latā’if al-Ishārāt. There is also the Latā’if al-Ishārāt li
Funūn al-Qirā’at by A╕mad b. Mu╕ammad al-Qastallani (d. 1517). It is
possible this later work cites al-Būnī, or it is possible al-Būnī’s work by this
name simply has escaped our attention.
248 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
of the Qur’ān (Fāti╕at al-Kitāb), bear witness that I have forgiven
him and accepted his good deeds. I shall not burn his tongue
with the Fire, and I shall protect him from the torment of the
grave, the torment of the Fire, the torment of the Day of
Resurrection, and the most terrifying plight. He will meet with
me before (he meets) all the Prophets and saints.’”
The Opening Chapter of the Qur’ān, al-Fāti╕a
Sufficient proof of the excellence of al-Fāti╕a is the fact it is
called “Mother of the Book.” It consists of the seven oftrepeated (verses).7 As mentioned in Rū╕ al-Bayān, its special
merits include those referred to by the Prophet ! when he
said:
If it had been in the Torah, the people of Moses would not have
adopted Judaism. If it had been in the Gospel, the people of Jesus
would not have adopted Christianity. If it had been in the
Psalms, the people of David would not have been transformed
into monkeys. For any Muslim who recites it, Allah will grant
him the same reward as if he had recited the whole Qur’ān, and
as if he had made charitable donations to every believing man
and believing woman.
Its special merits also include the fact that it contains
twenty-two letters of the Arabic alphabet, and twenty-two was
the number of those who helped the Prophet ! after he
received the revelation. Seven letters (of the Arabic alphabet)
do not occur in al-Fāti╕a. They are the thā’ of al-thubūr
(destruction), the jīm of al-ja╕īm (Hellfire), the khā’ of al-khawf

7. After the Basmala, these verses are: “Praise be to Allah, the Lord of all the
worlds/The Compassionate, the Merciful/ Master of the Day of Judgment/
You alone do we worship, and You alone do we ask for help/ Guide us to
the straight path/ The path of those whom You have favored/ Not of those
who have incurred Your wrath, nor of those who have gone astray” (Qur’ān,
1:1-7).
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 249
(fear), the zāy of al-zaqqūm (the tree of bitter fruit in Hell), the
shīn of al-shaqāwa (misfortune), the ╛ā’ of al-╛ulma (darkness),
and the fā’ of al-firāq (separation). If someone firmly believes in
(the merit of) this Qur’ān chapter, and recites it in a state of
reverence and veneration, he will be safe from these seven
things.
According to ╔udhayfa, the Prophet ! said: “Allah will
surely inflict the people with a prescribed and inevitable
punishment, but when He hears one of the children in school
(maktab) saying, ‘Praise be to Allah, Lord of all the worlds,’ He
will relieve the people’s punishment for forty years.” 8
As previously mentioned, the knowledge of all the
revelations are contained not only in the Qur’ān, but also in
the Fāti╕a. So if someone learns its interpretation, he is like
someone who has learned the interpretation of the whole
Qur’ān, and if someone recites it, it is as if he has recited the
whole Qur’ān. According to al-Tafsīr al-Kabīr, “The reason is
that the purpose of all the revelations is to provide knowledge
of the roots, branches and discoveries, and Fāti╕a is known to
contain all of this.” Al-Nawawī said,
That is because its first part, up to Allah’s saying, “Master of the
Day of Judgment” (1:4), indicates the basic articles of faith
relating to Divinity, in terms of Divine Essence, Attributes and
Action. Understanding the notion of praise (╕amd) requires
comprehension of the essential, attributive and acting
perfections (of the One praised). It also alludes to the Prophecy
and sainthood, since the Prophets and the saints are endowed
with the finest and most special blessings. It also alludes to the
belief in the Hereafter, because Allah is the Master of everything
on the Day of Resurrection.

8. ╔adīth cited by al-Zamakhshari in his Qur’ān exegesis entitled al-Kashshāf
‘an ╔aqā’iq Ghawāmid al-Tanzīl.
250 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
As for its middle part, namely, “You alone do we worship,
of You alone do we seek help” (1:5), this refers to the rules
governing the acts of true worship, which form a bond between
the Real and the servant. This also concerns the business
dealings and restraints imposed upon the servants, because
seeking help is lawful only when its purpose is either the
obtainment of benefits or the prevention of harmful things.
As for the conclusion, “Guide us to the straight path, the
path of those whom You have blessed, not of those who earn
Your wrath, nor of those who go astray” (1:6-7), this relates to
the believers’ quest for the kinds of guidance that are the
consequence of true faith.
The submission (islām) mentioned in the second part, (“You
alone do we worship, of You alone do we seek help”) relates to
the various aspects of spiritual excellence (i╕sān). By this I mean
the three degrees of praiseworthy spiritual virtues (akhlāq). It
also includes the covenanted witnessing (of Allah) in the saying
of the Prophet !, “You must worship Allah as if you see Him.”
It also relates to the perfections witnessed at the point of total
immersion in the manifestation of Divine Majesty, as indicated
by the expression, “as if” in the (above) Prophetic tradition.
These (insights) are included among the sciences of
revelations. And Allah is the One who knows the secrets of all
mysteries.
As for the Amīn (“Amen,” pronounced at the end of
Fāti╕a’s recitation), the Prophet ! once said, “Gabriel taught
me to say Amīn when I had finished reciting the Fāti╕a, and he
said, ‘It is like the seal on the Book.’”9 ‘Alī ! added a
clarification to this when he said, “Amīn is the seal of the Lord
of all the worlds, with which He seals His servant’s
supplication. The secret of this is that, just as a seal protects

9. ╔adīth cited by al-Zamakhshari in al-Kashshāf.
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 251
what is sealed from intrusion and mishandling, so does the
Amīn protect the servant’s supplication from disappointment.”
Wahb said, “With each of its letters, an Angel has been created
who says, “O Allah, forgive anyone who says, ‘Amīn.’”
According to Prophetic tradition, “The supplicant and the
person who says Amīn are partners.” This is in reference to
Allah’s saying, “He said, ‘The supplication of the two has been
answered’” (Qur’ān, 10:89). The Prophet ! said:
When the prayer leader says (at the end of Fāti╕a), “Nor of those
who go astray,” you must say, “Amīn,” for the Angels will say it,
and if a person’s saying Amīn coincides with the Angels saying
Amīn, he will be forgiven all his previous sins.10
Some say the coinciding (mentioned in this tradition)
refers to the timing of the utterance. Others say it refers to
sincerity and singular devotion. There is also difference of
opinion with regard to (the identity of) these Angels: some say
they are the Guardian Angels, while some say they are others.
The latter view is supported by the saying attributed to the
Prophet: ! “If a person’s utterance coincides with the
utterance of the Inhabitants of Heaven …”11 It is also possible
for the two views to be reconciled by maintaining that the
Angels concerned are both the Guardian Angels and the
Inhabitants of Heaven. This is a lengthy topic, so we have
restrained the pen from writing more about it here.
The Plea for Forgiveness
Next in our litany comes the plea for Allah’s forgiveness (alistighfār), repeated one hundred times. Allah the Exalted has

10. ╔adīth reported in the ╖a╕ī╕ of Imam Bukhārī, the ╖a╕ī╕ of Imam
Muslim, the Sunan of al-Nasā’ī and the Musnad of Imam A╕mad.
11. ╔adīth reported in the Sunan of al-Tirmidhī.
252 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
said, “And (you are instructed) that you must beg forgiveness
of your Lord” (11:3). The Prophet ! said, “My heart is surely
distracted, so I plead for Allah’s forgiveness seventy times
each day.”12 I would add here that this distraction was the
distraction of lights, not the distraction of others apart from
Allah. Since he ! was constantly elevated with each breath, he
saw every spiritual station as deficient in comparison to the
one above it. His plea for forgiveness should be understood in
this sense. Allah knows best. In al-Kawkab al-Wahhāj, (Shaykh
A╕mad Sukayrij) said:
Know that it is incumbent on every intelligent and truthful
person to preoccupy himself with pleading for forgiveness in the
watches of the night and at the two ends of the day. The human
being is not faultless, and if someone is overconfident of his
obedience, he is debarred (from the Divine Presence).
If you should say, “I have not sinned,” a voice will reply,
“Your existence is a sin, with which no sin can be
compared!”13
Shaykh Abū al-╔asan al-Shādhilī ! said, “You must make
the plea for forgiveness, even if no sin has been committed.
Consider how the Prophet ! begged forgiveness, even after
receiving the glad tiding of Allah’s forgiving all his previous and
future sins. If this applies to the perfect being !, who never
committed a sin and was sanctified from that, what do you think
of someone who is not free from shortcoming and sin at any
moment of time?”

12. ╔adīth reported in the ╖a╕ī╕ of Imam Muslim, the Sunan of Abū Dāwūd,
the ╖a╕ī╕ of Imam Bukhārī and the Sunan of al-Tirmidhī.
13. These poetic verses are also cited in the Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī. The meaning
draws on an understanding of fanā’ (annihilation in the Divine Presence),
and the knowledge that nothing exists except Allah.
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 253
The excellence of the plea for forgiveness is the subject of
many Qur’ān verses and Prophetic traditions. Allah’s
Messenger ! once said:
Allah the Exalted has sent down to me two assurances of
immunity for my community: “Allah will not punish them while
you (the Prophet) are among them” (Qur’ān, 8:33); and “Allah
will not punish them while they are pleading for forgiveness”
(8:33). So when I pass away, I will leave the plea for forgiveness
among them.14
And Allah’s Messenger ! once said, as reported by Abū
Dāwūd, al-╘abarānī, Abū Ya’lī and Ibn Mardawayh:
An Angel came to me from my Lord, and he said, “Yet if
someone commits an evil deed, or wrongs his own soul, but then
seeks forgiveness of Allah, he will find Allah the Forgiving, the
Merciful” (4:110). They (the companions) had been troubled by
the Qur’ān verse revealed before, “If someone commits an evil
deed, he will be requited for it” (4:123), so I was keen to give the
good news to my companions.15
‘Uwaymir Abū al-Dardā’ ! said:
I asked, “O Messenger of Allah, will a person be forgiven even if
he commits adultery or theft, but then seeks forgiveness?” He
said, “Yes!” I asked again, “O Messenger of Allah, even if he
commits adultery or theft, but then seeks forgiveness, will he be
forgiven?” He said, “Yes!” Then I asked a third time, and he
said, “Yes, just to put ‘Uwaymir’s nose out of joint!” Ka’b b.
Dhahl said, “I saw Abū al-Dardā’ punch himself in the nose!”16

14. ╔adīth on the authority of Abū Musa al-Ash’ari reported in the Sunan of
al-Tirmidhī.
15. ╔adīth on the authority of Abū al-Dardā’ reported by Abū Dāwūd, al-
╘abarānī, Abū Ya’lī and Ibn Mardawayh.
16. Narration cited by al-Suyū╙ī in al-Durr al-Manthūr and by al-Haythami in
Majma’ al-Zawā’id.
254 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
As reported by Ibn Jarīr and Ibn al-Mundhir, Ibn ‘Abbās,
in reference to Allah’s saying, “Yet if someone commits an evil
deed, or wrongs his own soul, but then seeks forgiveness of
Allah…” (4:110), said:
Allah the Exalted has informed His servants of His clemency,
His pardon, His noble generosity, and the vast extent of His
mercy and His forgiveness. For if someone commits a sin, be it
small or large, but then seeks forgiveness of Allah, he will find
Allah the Forgiving, the Merciful, even if his sins were larger
than the mountains, the earth and the heavens.17
Allah’s Messenger ! also said, on the authority of Abū
Hurayra and reported in Muslim:
By the One in whose Hand is my soul, if you do not sin and seek
forgiveness, Allah will remove you and replace you with a
people who will sin and beg forgiveness, and whom He will
forgive.18
According to the report of Imam Ibn ╔anbal !, the
Prophet ! said:
Iblīs said (to Allah), “By Your Might, I will not desist from
misleading Your servants, so long as their spirits remain in their
bodies.” Allah said in response, “By My Might and My Majesty,
I will not cease to forgive them, so long as they seek My
forgiveness.”19
As reported by al-╘abarānī, Anas b. Mālik ! said:
A man once came to Allah’s Messenger ! and said, “O
Messenger of Allah, I have sinned.” So the Prophet ! said to
him, “Whenever you have committed a sin, appeal to your Lord
for forgiveness.”

17. Narration reported by Ibn Jarīr in his Qur’ān commentary, Jāmi’ al-Bayān.
18. ╔adīth on the authority of Abū Hurayra reported in the ╖a╕ī╕ of Imam
Muslim and the Kitāb al-Da’awāt of al-Tirmidhī.
19. ╔adīth on the authority of Abū Sa’īd al-Khu╓ri reported in the Musnad of
Imam A╕mad and al-Tarhīb wa al-Targhīb of al-Mundhiri.
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 255
The man said, “I do appeal to my Lord for forgiveness, but
then I backslide and sin again.” The response was again,
“Whenever you have committed a sin, appeal to your Lord for
forgiveness.”
Then, when it came to his response to being asked the
question a fourth time, the Prophet ! said, “Appeal to your
Lord, Almighty and Glorious is He, for forgiveness, so that Satan
will be the one who is spurned.”20
When relating what he had received from his Lord,
Almighty and Glorious is He, Allah’s Messenger ! said, as
reported by Bukhārī and Muslim:
When a servant sins, and then says, “O Allah, forgive me my
sins,” He, Blessed and Exalted is He, will say, “My servant
committed a sin, but he knows that he has a Lord who forgives
sins and inflicts punishment for sin.”
Then, when he relapses and sins again, he says, “O Allah,
forgive me my sins.” He, Blessed and Exalted is He, will say,
“My servant committed a sin, but he knows that he has a Lord
who forgives sins and inflicts punishment for sin.”
Then, when he relapses and sins again, he says, “O Allah,
forgive me my sins.” He, Blessed and Exalted is He, will say,
“My servant committed a sin, but he knows that he has a Lord
who forgives sins and inflicts punishment for sin. I have granted
(him) forgiveness, so let him do whatever he wishes.”21
In another version of the Prophetic tradition, the wording
is, “Do whatever you wish, for I have forgiven you.”22

20. ╔adīth in al-╘abarānī, also cited in al-Haythami’s Majma’ al-Zawā’id.
21. ╔adīth on the authority of Abū Hurayra reported by Imam Bukhārī and
Imam Muslim.
22. Aside from Bukhārī and Muslim as above, this version is found in al-
╔akim’s al-Mustadrik and al-Hindi’s Kanz al-‘Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa alAf’al.
256 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
As reported in Kashf al-Ghumma, the Prophet ! used to say:
“Whenever a Muslim commits a sin, the Angel will wait for
three hours. Then, if he seeks forgiveness for his sins, the
Angel will not record his offense, and Allah will not punish
him on the Day of Resurrection.”23 He ! also used to say,
“Hearts have a rust like the rust of iron, and the polish for
hearts is the plea for forgiveness.”24 As reported in Targhīb al-
╘ālib, the Prophet ! also said:
You must make a frequent practice of pleading for forgiveness,
for the plea of forgiveness consumes sins, just as the fire
consumes wood, and just as the sheep consume grass. If a man’s
record contains no plea for forgiveness, it will have no light
when it is raised to heaven. If it does contain the plea for
forgiveness, it will have a light that sparkles when it ascends,
even if it contains no more than a slight trace of the plea for
forgiveness. Whenever a group of people participate in a session
of idle sport, and then conclude it with the plea for forgiveness,
the whole of that session of theirs will be recorded in their favor
as a plea for forgiveness.
As reported by al-Nasafī,25 the Prophet ! said:
There is not one Muslim for whom a record sheet is not inscribed
each day. If it contains no plea for forgiveness by the time it is
folded up, it will be pitch-black when folded. But if it does
contain a plea for forgiveness by the time it is folded up, it will
have a light that sparkles when folded.
As reported by al-Bayhaqī, on the authority of Anas b.
Mālik, Allah’s Messenger ! said, “Let me direct your attention
to your sickness and your remedy: your sins are your sickness,

23. ╔adīth cited by ‘Abd al-Wahhāb al-Sha’rānī in his book, Kashf al-Ghumma
‘an Jami’ al-Umma, and also in al-Hakim’s al-Mustadrik.
24. This is also found in Kashf al-Ghumma.
25. This is likely ‘Abd-Allah b. A╕mad al-Nasafi (d. 1310), the great
interpreter of the Qur’ān and Hanafi legal scholar.
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 257
and your remedy is the plea for forgiveness.”26 On the
authority of ‘Abd-Allah, as reported by Ibn Mājah, Bashshār !
said, “I once heard Allah’s Messenger ! say, ‘Congratulations
to someone who finds many a plea for forgiveness in his
record!’”27 Anas b. Mālik !, as reported by al-Tirmidhī, said:
I once heard Allah’s Messenger ! say, “Allah the Exalted has
said, ‘O son of Adam, whenever you appeal to Me and implore
Me, I forgive you, whatever you have done, and I do not care. O
son of Adam, if you came to Me with a load of sins equivalent to
the volume of the earth, provided that you came to Me without
attributing any partner to Me, I would grant you its equivalent
volume in forgiveness.’”28
These are only a small sample of the well-known Prophetic
traditions on this subject. “And Allah speaks the truth, and He
shows the way” (Qur’ān, 33:4).
The Invocation of Blessing on the Prophet !
Next in our litany comes the invocation, recited one hundred
times:
O Allah, bless our master Mu╕ammad, the opener of what was
closed, the seal of what came before, the helper of Truth by the
Truth, the guide to Your straight path. And on his family
(blessing), may this prayer be commensurate with his worth, and
the greatness of his extent in space and time.
Allah the Exalted has said, “Allah and His Angels shower
blessings on the Prophet. O you who believe, invoke blessings
upon him and salute him with a worthy salutation” (Qur’ān,

26. ╔adīth related in Imam al-Bayhaqi’s Sha’b al-Imān.
27. ╔adīth reported in the Sunan of Ibn Mājah and in the Sunan of Abū
Na’īm.
28. ╔adīth reported by Ibn Mājah in his Sunan, and by Abū Na’īm in Hilyat
al-Awliyā’.
258 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
33:56). In reference to this verse, it is reported in Rū╕ al-Bayān
that Sahl b. ‘Abd-Allah al-Tustarī, may Allah sanctify his
innermost being, said: “The invocation of blessing upon
Mu╕ammad is the most meritorious of the acts of worship,
because Allah has undertaken it, He and His Angels, and then
He has commanded the believers to perform it, and the other
acts of worship are not like that.” The point here is that Allah
the Exalted has commanded the performance of the other acts
of worship, but He has not performed them Himself. The most
truthful (al-╖addīq al-Akbar, Shaykh A╕mad Tijānī) once said:
The invocation of blessing upon him ! is more effective in
eradicating sins than cold water in extinguishing fire. It is more
meritorious than the emancipation of slaves. The emancipation
of slaves is analogous to emancipation from the Fire of Hell and
entry into the Garden of Paradise. But the peace invoked upon
the Prophet ! is the Peace of Allah, and the Peace of Allah is
more excellent than one thousand benefactions.
Al-Wāsītī29 said, “Invoke blessing upon him in abundance,
and do not assign a fixed amount to them in your heart.”
According to Prophetic tradition:
Allah has an Angel whom He has empowered to listen to all
creatures, and he will stand by my grave from the time of my
death until the Day of Resurrection. Whenever any member of my
community invokes a blessing on me, the Angel will name him by
his personal name and the name of his father. He will say, “O
Mu╕ammad, so-and-so, the son of so-and-so has invoked so-andso many blessings upon you.” And for every single one of those
blessings the Lord will bestow ten upon that man.30

29. This is likely A╕mad Imād al-Dīn al-Wāsitī (d. 1311), a Shādhili Sufi and
student of Ibn Taymiyya, who was one of the first to use the term, Tariqa
Mu╕ammadiyya.
30. ╔adīth cited by al-Albāni in Silsilat al-A╕adīth al-╖a╕ī╕a.
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 259
In another tradition, the Prophet ! said, “When you
invoke blessing upon me, you must perform the invocation in
an excellent manner, for you will be presented to me by your
personal names and the names of your fathers, your kinsfolk
and your paternal uncles.”31 The invocation of blessing is best
performed with presence of the heart and concentration of the
mind. One of the authorities has said:
Invocations of blessing upon the Prophet are a form of obedience,
a means of drawing near, a means of connection and a dutiful
compliance; but only when they are performed with the intention
of spiritual salutation, seeking access, and drawing near to the
presence of the A╕madi Prophecy. As you must surely be aware,
drawing near to the moon is like drawing near to the sun, for the
moon is its mirror and the target of its rays of light.
According to tradition, the Prophet ! said, “If someone
invokes blessing upon me one time, Allah will command his
Guardian Angel to refrain from recording anything to his
discredit for three days.”32
A woman saw her son after his death. He was suffering
torment, so she was very sad. Some time later, however, she
saw him bathed in light and mercy, so she asked him about it
and he said, “When passing by the graveyard, a man invoked
blessing on the Prophet ! and presented its reward to the
dead. Allah made forgiveness my share of that (reward), so I
have been forgiven.” It is related that Sufyān al-Thawrī,33 may
Allah bestow His mercy on him, said:

31. ╔adīth cited by ‘Alā’ al-Dīn al-Hindi in Kanz al-‘Ummāl fi Sunan al-Aqwāl
wa al-Af’āl.
32. ╔adīth found in al-Suyū╙ī’s al-Habā’ik fi Akhbār al-Malā’ik.
33. Sufyan al-Thawri b. Sa’īd (d. 778) was an early scholar of the Qur’ān,
jurisprudence and ╔adīth. He is known as one of the “Eight Ascetics”, along
with ╔asan al-Ba╗rī, among others.
260 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
While I was circumambulating the Sacred House (in Mecca), I
was surprised to see a man who did not lift a foot without
invoking blessing upon the Prophet !. I said, “You there, you
have omitted glorifying Allah (tasbīh) and declaring Allah’s
Oneness (tahlīl), and gone straight to the invocation of blessing
on the Prophet !. Have you any explanation for this?”
He said, “Who are you? May Allah protect you.”
I said, “I am Sufyān al-Thawrī.”
So he said, “Had you not been a stranger among the people
of your time, I would not have informed you of my spiritual
state, and I would not have revealed to you my secret.” Then he
went on to say: “My father and I set out as pilgrims toward
Allah’s Sacred House. When we were in one of the camping sites
along the way, my father fell ill and died. His face turned dark,
his eyes turned blue, and his stomach became inflated. So I wept
and said, ‘To Allah we belong, to Him we are returning’ (Qur’ān,
2:156). My father died like this, in a foreign land, so I drew the
death shroud over his face.
“Then sleep got the better of my eyes. In my dream, I found
myself with a man who was far more handsome, more finely
dressed and more fragrantly perfumed than anyone I had ever
seen. He approached my father and removed the shroud from
his face, and wiped it (with his hands). My father’s face became
whiter than milk. Then he rubbed his stomach, and it returned to
its normal condition. He was then about to depart, so I went to
him, caught hold of his cloak, and said, ‘O my master, by the
One who sent you to my father, as a mercy in a foreign land,
who are you?’ He said, ‘I am Mu╕ammad, the Messenger of
Allah. This father of yours was guilty of many acts of sinful
disobedience, but he would often invoke blessing on me. Then
when what happened to him happened, he appealed to me for
help. So I came to his aid, for I am a source of help for anyone
who often invokes blessing on me in the abode of this world.’
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 261
“I woke up from sleep at that point, and behold, my father’s
face had indeed turned white, and the bloating of his stomach
had disappeared.”
Ka’b b. ‘Ujra ! said:
When the saying of Allah the Exalted – “O you who believe,
invoke blessings upon him and salute him with a worthy
salutation” – was revealed, we approach him ! and said, “As for
greeting you with the salutation with peace, we are familiar with
that already; but what about the invocation of blessing upon
you, O Messenger of Allah?”
He replied, “Say: ‘O Allah, bestow blessing upon
Mu╕ammad and upon the family of Mu╕ammad, as You have
bestowed blessing upon Abraham and upon the family of
Abraham. You are indeed the Praiseworthy, the Glorious. And
sanctify Mu╕ammad and the family of Mu╕ammad, as You have
sanctified Abraham and the family of Abraham. You are indeed
the Praiseworthy, the Glorious.’”34
The above is found in Tafsīr al-Taysīr.35
Concerning ╖alāt al-Fāti╕, the Invocation of the Opener
Our Shaykh, our master, and our means of access to our Lord,
A╕mad b. Mu╕ammad al-Tijānī, had this to say about ╖alāt alFāti╕, as recorded in the Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī:
When I returned to Tlemcen (Algeria) from the Pilgrimage, I
became preoccupied with offering the “Invocation of the Opener
of what was locked” (╖alāt al-Fātih li-mā ‘Ughliq), because I had
discovered its excellence: offering it one time is worth six

34. ╔adīth reported in the ╖a╕ī╕ of Imam Bukhārī, the ╖a╕ī╕ of Imam
Muslim, and the Sunan of al-Tirmidhī.
35. It is possible the work referred to here is the Taysīr al-Karīm al-Rahmān fī
Tafsīr al-Qur’ān of ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Nāsir al-Sa’di al-Tamīmī (d. 1956,
Saudi Arabia). If so, this would be one of the few contemporary works the
Shaykh cites in the Kāshif.
262 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
hundred thousand ritual prayers, as stated in Wardat al-Juyūb.
According to the author of this work, the author of the
invocation, Sīdī Mu╕ammad al-Bakri al-Siddīqī !36 – a saintly
pole (qu╙b) and frequent visitor to Egypt – had said: “If someone
offers it one time, and does not enter the Garden, let him arrest
its author in the presence of Allah.”
I persisted in offering this invocation until I returned from
Tlemcen to Abū Samghūn. Then, when I saw a prayer, one of
which is worth seventy-thousand complete recitals of Dalā’il alKhayrāt, I became preoccupied with that. This prayer is, “O
Allah, bless our master Mu╕ammad and his family, with a
blessing that is equal to all the blessings of those who enjoy Your
loving affection, and grant our master Mu╕ammad and his
family a peace that is equal to their peace.”
I saw great merit in that, but then the Prophet !
commanded me to return to ╖alāt al-Fāti╕ li-mā ‘Ughliq. When I
asked him ! about its merit, he first informed me that offering it
once is equal to reciting the entire Qur’ān six times. He later told
me that offering it one time is equal to all the glorification (tasbī╕)
that has ever been offered in the universe, to all the
remembrance (dhikr), to all supplication (du’ā’), great or small,
and to reciting the Qur’ān six thousand times.37

36. According to Tijānī tradition, Mu╕ammad al-Bakrī (d. 1545) discovered
this prayer on a sheet of light after spiritual retreat inside the Sacred House
(Ka’ba) in Mecca.
37. This has been contextualized by numerous Tijānī authors, including by
Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī himself, by reference to different ranks of Qur’ān
readers. According to the explanation of Shaykh ╔asan Cisse based on the
Jāmi’, those who fail to implement what the Qur’ān commands them are
actually being cursed by the Qur’ān as the read it; so this statement applies
to them. Otherwise, for the knowledgable person of Allah, nothing is better
than reading the Qur’ān. Elsewhere in the Jawāhir, Shaykh al-Tijānī
emphasized that the invocation of blessing on the Prophet is a
supererogatory worship, while recitation of the Qur’ān is obligatory on the
believer; so that the recitation can never be left aside. The Shaykh said:
“Rather the recitation of the Qur’ān is more vital (than prayer on the
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 263
In al-Kawkab al-Wahhāj, (Shaykh Sukayrij) said: “If you
wish to acquire some knowledge of this reality so the matter
will become clear to you and so that you will not slip into
dangerous pitfalls, you should understand what our master !
said in a written response to the khalīfa, our master ‘Alī
Harāzim Barāda, sanctified be his innermost being.” Here is
the text of the letter, as recorded in Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī:
The special quality of ╖alāt al-Fāti╕ li-mā ‘Ughliq is a Divine affair,
to which the minds have no access. Imagine one hundred
thousand nations, each nation consisting of one hundred
thousand tribes, with one hundred thousand men in each tribe,
each one of them living for one hundred thousand years, and
each one of them offering invocation of blessing on the Prophet
!, but with other than ╖alāt al-Fāti╕ li-mā ‘Ughliq. If the reward of
all these nations, for all these remembrances throughout all these
years, were to be combined, they would not equal the reward of
one single offering of ╖alāt al-Fāti╕ li-mā ‘Ughliq.
So pay no attention to the falsehoods of the liars, or to the
accusations of the slanderers, for bountiful grace is at the
disposal of Allah, who bestows it upon whomever He will. Allah
the Glorious and Exalted has bountiful grace beyond the realm
of comprehension. Enough for you is His saying, “And He
creates that which you do not know” (Qur’ān, 16:8).
For the one who would turn himself towards Allah the
Exalted, there is no act of dedication to match it, none
whatsoever. The one exception is the degree attained by
someone who dedicates himself to Allah the Exalted by invoking
His Greatest Name. That is the ultimate act of dedication, and
the highest degree of all acts of worship. There is no limit to its
excellent merit, and no terminal point above it. This invocation

Prophet), because it is required by the Sacred Law due to its merits narrated
to us, and because it is the foundation of the Sacred Law and the way of the
Lord’s dealing with creation. There is also the great punishment reserved for
the one who leaves the Qur’ān” (Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī).
264 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
(╖alāt al-Fāti╕) ranks close to it in degree, dedication, reward, and
the attainment of Allah’s love for its practitioner, with the best of
results. If someone dedicates himself to Allah sincerely in this
manner, he will succeed in gaining Allah’s good pleasure and
His reward, in his worldly life and in his life in the next world,
to an extent that all good deeds cannot enable him to reach.
Thereby he will experience the Divine bounty to an extent
beyond his most hopeful expectations.
This gracious favor cannot be achieved except by humble
submission. If someone wishes to argue about this subject, he
must desist, for he will derive no benefit from the examination of
proofs. You must refrain from debating with someone who asks
you for proofs, because that kind of discussion, involving
refutation and response, is like the endless heaving of the ocean
waves. Hearts are in Allah’s Hand. He controls them and moves
them to and fro. If someone wishes for good fortune and success
in obtaining the reward of this matchless sapphire, he must
enrapture his heart in belief of what he hears about it, and he
must practice humble submission before the bountiful grace of
Allah the Glorious by refraining from delimitation and
analogical deduction. He must focus his attention on using it as a
means of dedication to Allah the Exalted, and as a means of
approaching Him. “So no soul knows what comfort is kept
secretly in store for them, as a reward for what they used to do”
(Qur’ān, 32:17). If Allah wishes to preclude someone from its
benefit, He will distract his heart with whispers, and make him
wonder, “Where does the news of it come from?” You must
devote your attention to what we have told you. If someone
follows you in that, and refrains from debating with you about
the investigation of evidence, we shall accept him on the
strength of what you say about him.
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 265
A full discussion of the matchless sapphire (al-yaqūtat alfarīda)38 could not be contained within many large volumes,
but this small discussion provides sufficient provision.
The Glorification of Allah
Also in our litany are the words of Allah the Exalted:
Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of Majesty,
Far from what they attribute!
And peace be upon those sent as Messengers,
And praise be to Allah, Lord of all the worlds! (Qur’ān, 37:180-
182).
Allah said, “And glorify Him at the dawn and in the
evening” (33:42). According to an authentic Prophetic
tradition, cited in al-Suyū╙ī’s al-Jāmi’ al-╖aghīr, “The best of
speech is, ‘Glorify be to Allah, and praise be to Allah, and
there is no god but Allah, and Allah is the Greatest.’”39 As
recorded in Rū╕ al-Bayān, on the authority of ‘Alī !, the
Prophet ! said, “If someone would love to be measured by the
fullest measure of reward on the Day of Resurrection, let him
conclude his meeting with the words, ‘Glory be to the Lord,
the Lord of Majesty, far from what they attribute…’” (33:42).
The Rū╕ al-Bayān goes on to say:
The spiritual pauper, may Allah the All-Powerful improve him,
urges the believer to correct his spiritual state by doing two
things before he gets up from a meeting (with his fellows). The
first is to obtain abundant reward by recited the above
mentioned verses of the Qur’ān. The second is to make
atonement, as indicated by the Prophet ! in his saying: “If

38. This is another name for ╖alāt al-Fāti╕, and should not be confused with a
famous poem by the same name, authored by Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-Na╛īfī
(d. 1942, Morocco).
39. ╔adīth reported by Imam Bukhārī in his ╖a╕ī╕.
266 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
someone sits in a meeting, during which he does a lot of talking,
then he says before he gets up – ‘Glory be to You, O Allah, and
with praise to You; I bear witness that there is no god but You; I
seek Your forgiveness and I repent to You’ – he surely will be
granted forgiveness.”
This is to say, (he will be granted forgiveness) for minor sins,
which do not violate the rights of human beings, like slander.
Instead of being heedless during his sitting with people,
therefore, the intelligent person must remember his Lord and
His Intimate Presence, and conclude his meeting with the
appropriate words: “And the conclusion of their supplication
will be, ‘Praise be to Allah, Lord of all the worlds!’” (Qur’ān,
10:10).
Since our purpose is to discuss the glorification of Allah
(tasbī╕), and this conversation (by its nature) drifts from one
topic to another, permit us to devote attention to the “Prayer
of Glorification” (salāt al-tasbī╕). As reported by Imam alTabarānī and Abū Na’īm, Ibn ‘Abbās B ! said:
Al-‘Abbās once came to the Prophet ! at an unusual hour, so
someone said, “O Messenger of Allah !, this is your paternal
uncle at the door.” He said, “Let him come in, for he must have
come with some important business!” Then, when al-‘Abbās
entered his presence, the Prophet ! asked him, “What has
brought you at this hour, O my paternal uncle?” He replied, “O
son of my brother, I recalled the Age of Ignorance (al-Jāhiliyya)
and its stupidity, then this world oppressed me, regardless of its
spaciousness. I cried, ‘Who will comfort me?’, but I realized that
there is no one who can comfort me, except Allah the Exalted,
and then you.”
The Prophet ! responded by saying, “Praise be to Allah,
who has instilled this in your heart! Shall I offer you a present?”
His uncle said, “Yes!” He replied, “Shall I give you a gift?” His
uncle said “Yes!”
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 267
The Prophet ! then told him: “During any time in which the
ritual prayer can be performed – not following the afternoon
prayer (‘asr) and not after the rising of the sun (after the dawn
prayer until the daylight), but anytime in between – you must
perform your ritual ablution correctly, then stand in honor of
Allah the Almighty and Glorious. Recite the Opening of the
Qur’ān (Fāti╕a al-Kitāb) and another chapter (sūra), which you
may select from the beginning of the final section of the Qur’ān.
Then, when you have completed the Sūra, you must say fifteen
times: ‘Glory be to Allah, and praise be to Allah, and there is no
god but Allah, and Allah is Supremely Great!’ Then, when you
perform your act of bowing (rukū’), you must say that ten times.
Then, when you raise your head from bowing, you must say that
ten times. Then, when you perform the prostration (sajda), you
must say that ten times. Then, when you raise your head and
adopt the sitting posture (jalsa), you must recite that ten times.
Then, when you perform the act of prostration again, you must
say it ten times. Then, when you raise your head and adopt the
sitting posture again, you must say that ten times. This adds up
to a total of seventy five (glorifications).
“You must then stand up and perform another cycle (rak’a),
in which you must do what you did in the first. Then you must
say it ten times before the profession of faith (al-tashahhud). This
brings the total to one hundred and fifty. You must then perform
two other cycles like that, so this brings the total to three
hundred.
“If you have completed (this prayer), even if your sins are
equal in number to the stars in the sky, Allah will erase them.
(He will erase them) even if they are like a huge pile of sand, and
even if they are like the foam of an ocean.
“If you can, perform this prayer once daily. If you cannot do
so, then one time every Friday. If you cannot do that, then
268 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
perform it once a month. If you cannot even do that, then every
year as long as you are still alive.”40
A similar narration is recorded in al-╔āfi╛ al-Mundhirī’s
al-Targhīb wa al-Tarhīb.41 On the authority of ‘Ikrimah, Ibn
‘Abbās ! said:
The Messenger of Allah ! said to al-‘Abbās b. ‘Abd al-Mu╙╙alib:
“O ‘Abbās, O my paternal uncle! Shall I not give you a gift? Shall
I not grant you a favor? Shall I not offer you a present? Shall I
not do something for you? (Let me tell you about) ten virtuous
deeds (khi╗āl) that, when performed, Allah will grant you
forgiveness for your sins, the first of them and the last, that
which was committed long ago and that which was committed
recently, that which was done mistakenly and that which was
done deliberately, that which is major and that which is minor,
and that which is committed in private and that which is
committed in public.
“There are ten virtuous deeds: Perform four cycles (raka’āt)
of ritual prayer, reciting in each one the Opening of the Qur’ān
(Fāti╕a al-Kitāb) and a Sūra. When you have completed the
recitation at the beginning of a cycle, say fifteen times, while you
are standing erect, ‘Glory be to Allah, and praise be to Allah, and
there is no god but Allah, and Allah is Supremely Great!’ Then
perform the act of bowing, and then say it ten times while in this
position. Then raise your head from the bowing posture, and
repeat it another ten times. Then move into the prostrating
position, and recite it ten times. Then raise your head from the
posture of prostration, and say it again ten times. Then move
into the prostrating position again, reciting it ten times. Then
raise yourself from prostrating and recite it ten times more. This

40. Reported by Abū Dāwūd is his Sunan, and by Ibn Mājah in his Sunan.
41. Al-╔āfi╛ al-Mundhirī (d. 1258), whose real name was Abd al-‘A╛īm b.
Abd al-Qawi, was originally from Damascus, but later moved to Egypt. He
was a famous ╔adīth scholar, and his work al-Targhīb wa al-Tarhīb is an
abridgment of ╖a╕ī╕ Muslim.
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 269
adds up to a total of seventy-five times in each movement.
Repeat all of this in three more cycles (raka’āt). If you are able to
perform this prayer once a day, then do so. If you are unable to
do so, then one time every Friday. If you cannot do that, then
one time every month. If you cannot do that, then do it once a
year. If you cannot even do that, then (do it at least) once in your
lifetime.”
In the version reported by al-╘abarānī, the Prophetic
tradition ends with the words: “Even if your sins are like the
foam of the ocean or like a great pile of sand, Allah will grant
you forgiveness.” According to al-╔āfi╛ (al-Mundhirī):
This Prophetic tradition has been reported through many lines of
transmission, and on the authority of a number of Companions.
This version attributed to ‘Ikrimah is the best example, for it has
been authenticated by a group of experts, including al-╔āfi╛ Abū
Bakr al-Ajurrī, our Shaykh Abū Mu╕ammad ibn ‘Abd ar-Ra╕īm
al-Mi╗rī, and our Shaykh al-╔āfi╛ Abū al-╔asan al-Maqdisī, may
Allah the Exalted bestow His mercy upon them. Abū Bakr ibn
Abī Dawūd said, “I heard my father say, ‘On the subject of the
prayer of glorification (╗alāt al-tasbī╕), there is no authentic
Prophetic tradition other than this.’” Muslim b. al-╔ajjāj, may
Allah have mercy on him, said, “Where this Prophetic tradition
is concerned, there is no finer chain of transmission (isnād) than
this,” referring to the chain of transmission that validates
‘Ikrimah’s report on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbās !. He (Ibn
‘Abbās) also said about concluding the prayer, “When I come to
the end (of the prayer of glorification), I say this after the
profession of faith (al-tashahhud) and before the salutation of
peace (al-salām):
“‘O Allah, I beseech You to grant me the success of the
people of right guidance, the actions of the people of certitude,
the sincere advice of the people of repentance, the firm resolve of
the people of patience, the wariness of the people of
270 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
apprehension, the quest of the people of yearning, the devotion
of the people of piety, and the insight of the people of
knowledge, so that I may be afraid of offending You.
“‘O Allah, I beseech You to grant me a sense of fear, by
which you will prevent me from committing acts of sinful
disobedience against You, so that I may practice obedience to
You with conduct that makes me worthy of Your good pleasure;
and so that I may be honest with You in repentance, for fear of
offending You, and so that I may be completely sincere with
You, for love of You, and so that I may place my trust in You
regarding all affairs, because of my excellent opinion of You.
Glory be to the Creator of Light…’”
I advise you to hold tightly this mighty and exalted
treasure!
The declaration that there is no god but Allah
Let us now consider the declaration, “There is no god but
Allah (lā ilāha ill-Allāh),” which is recited one-hundred times in
our litany. Allah the Exalted has said: “And remember Allah
often, so that you may be successful” (Qur’ān, 8:45). The
excellent qualities of this declaration are too many to be
enumerated, and it is impossible to provide a complete
account of the many authentic reports from Allah’s Messenger
! on the subject. But since this is an essential point, some
examples in proof of the declaration’s merit and meaning will
be discussed here. According to the erudite scholar and
gnostic, the eminent Sayyid A╕mad b. al-╔ājj al-‘Ayyāshī
Sukayrij, in al-Kawkab al-Wahhāj:
With regard to this blessed declaration, you should know that
the Imams of exoteric and esoteric knowledge are unanimously
agreed that nothing else will suffice the servants at the time of
their death and that none of the other remembrances will serve
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 271
as evidence of their profession of faith. Allah has commanded
His servants to believe it with firm conviction, for He the Exalted
has said, “So know that there is no god but Allah” (Qur’ān,
47:19)
According to a report from Abū Hurayra !, Allah’s
Messenger ! said, “I have been commanded to fight the
people until they bear witness that there is no god but
Allah.”42 Our master ‘Uthmān ! is reported as having said, “I
once heard Allah’s Messenger ! say: ‘I surely know a
declaration, which no servant can say without making him
immune from the Fire, so long as it is said truthfully from his
heart.’”43 Our master ‘Umar ! is recorded as saying, “I shall
tell you what it is. It is the declaration of sincere devotion,
which Mu╕ammad ! and his companions imposed as a duty:
‘There is no god but Allah!’” Abū Hurayra ! is reported as
having said,
 I said, “O Messenger of Allah !, who will be the most fortunate
of all people as a result of your intercession on the Day of
Ressurection?” He replied, “I had assumed, O Abū Hurayra, that
no one would be more likely than you to ask me this question,
because I had noticed your keen interest in what I have to say.
The most fortunate of all people, as a result of my intercession on
the Day of Resurrection, will be someone who says, ‘There is no
god but Allah,’ sincerely from his heart and soul.”44
The Prophet ! also said:
Whenever a servant says, “There is no god but Allah,” sincerely
from his heart, his declaration will ascend with no barrier to
obstruct it. Then when it reaches Allah the Exalted, He will look
at the person who uttered it, and He never looks at someone

42. Reported by Imam al-Bukhārī in his ╖a╕ī╕.
43. Reported by Imam A╕mad in his Musnad.
44. Reported by Imam al-Bukhārī in his ╖a╕ī╕.
272 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
who affirms His Oneness without bestowing His mercy upon
him.
According to another Prophetic tradition from Abū
Hurayra !, Allah’s Messenger ! said:
Allah the Exalted has a pillar of light in front of the Heavenly
Throne. When the servant says “There is no god but Allah,” that
pillar will shake. So Allah the Exalted will say “Be still!” It will
reply, “How can I be still, when You have not granted
forgiveness to the person who uttered this?” Allah the Exalted
will then say, “I have already granted him forgiveness.” And so
the pillar will promptly come to rest.45
According to a report from Abū Sa’īd al-Khudrī !, the
Prophet ! said:
Moses, peace be upon him, said, “O my Lord, teach me
something by which I may remember You and make
supplication to You.” His Lord replied, “O Moses, say, ‘There is
no god but Allah.’” Moses then said, “O my Lord, (but) all Your
servants say this!” His Lord told him again, “Say, ‘There is no
god but Allah!’” Moses then replied, “I only wish for something
by which You will show me special favor.” His Lord replied, “O
Moses, if the inhabitants of the seven heavens and the seven
earths were on one side of a scale, and (the declaration) ‘There is
no god but Allah’ was on the other side of the scale, ‘There is no
god but Allah’ would outweigh them all!”46
Another tradition that is attributed to the Prophet !
records him as saying:
No loneliness will afflict the people of “There is no god but
Allah,” neither in their graves, nor at their resurrection. It is as if
I am seeing the people of “There is no god but Allah” shaking off

45. Reported by Imam Abū Na’īm in ╔ilyat al-Awliyā’.
46. Reported by al-╔ākim in al-Mustadrik.
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 273
the dust from their heads and saying: “Praise be to Allah, for He
has relieved us of sorrow!”47
According to another tradition from Ibn ‘Abbās !, the
Prophet ! said:
Gabriel, peace be upon him, informed me: “‘There is no god but
Allah,’ will be the solace for the Muslim at the time of his death,
in his grave, and when he emerges from the grave. O
Mu╕ammad, if only you could see how it will be when they are
emerging from their graves, shaking the dust off of their heads!
This one will say: ‘There is no god but Allah,’ and his face will be
bright. Another will say: ‘Woe is me, because of my falling short
in my duty to Allah,’ and his face will be grim.”48
There is a report (khabar) in which the Prophet ! is
recorded as saying, “Allah the Exalted says: ‘There is no god
but Allah’ is My fortress; so if someone enters My fortress, he
will be safe from My punishment.”49 As reported by Imam alQurtBubī, with a chain of transmission, the Prophet ! said:
The Angel of Death, peace be upon him, approached a man and
penetrated every limb of his body, but found no goodness in it.
Then he split his heart open, but found nothing in it. Then he
tugged at his beard (and the man’s mouth opened), and he
found the tip of his tongue sticking to his palate, saying, “There
is no god but Allah.” (The Angel of Death) then told him, “You
have earned the Garden of Paradise by uttering the declaration
of sincere devotion!”
As reported by Anas b. Mālik ! from Mu’ādh b. Jabal, the
Prophet ! seated Mu’ādh behind him on his donkey named
‘Ufayr. He said, “O Mu’ādh!” Mu’ādh replied, “Doubly at

47. Cited by Imam al-Haythamī in Majma’ al-Zawā’id.
48. Shaykh Tijānī Cisse could not verify the relation of this ╔adīth through
Ibn ‘Abbas, but found it related instead through Ibn ‘Umar.
49. Cited by Mur╙ada al-Zabīdī in a commentary on Ihyā’ ‘Ulūm al-Dīn.
274 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
your service, O Messenger of Allah !, time after time!” He
called out to him a second time, and Mu’ādh said again,
“Doubly at your service, O Messenger of Allah, time after
time!” Then he called out to him a third time, saying “O
Mu’ādh!” And again, Mu’ādh replied, “Doubly at your
service, O Messenger of Allah, time after time!” He ! said,
“No servant bears witness that there is no god but Allah, and
that Mu╕ammad is Allah’s Messenger, truthfully from his
heart, without Allah the Exalted making him immune from
the Hellfire.” Mu’ādh then related: “I said, ‘O Messenger of
Allah, should I not inform the people of this, so they may
rejoice at the good news?’ He replied, ‘In that case, they will
surely put their trust (in the Lord)!’” Mu’ādh related this at the
time of his death, while repenting of his sins.50 According to a
╕adīth related by Ibn ‘Abbās, may Allah be well pleased with
him and his father, the Prophet ! said:
Allah the Exalted will open the gates of the Garden of Paradise,
and a herald will cry from beneath the Heavenly Throne, “O
Garden of Paradise and all the bounties you contain, to whom
do you belong?”
The Garden of Paradise and everything within it will
proclaim, “We belong to the people of ‘There is no god but
Allah.’ We seek none but the people of ‘There is no god but
Allah,’ and none but the people of ‘There is no god but Allah’
will enter our presence! We are forbidden to anyone who does
not say ‘There is no god but Allah.’”
At this point, the Hellfire and all of the torments it contains
will say, “None will enter me except those who deny that there
is no god but Allah. I seek none but those who do not believe
that there is no god but Allah. I am prohibited to those who

50. Reported by Imam al-Bukhārī in his ╖a╕ī╕ and by Imam Muslim in his
╖a╕ī╕.
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 275
declare ‘There is no god but Allah.’ I shall be filled with none but
those who refuse to accept that there is no god but Allah. My
wrath and my blazing fury are for none but those who deny that
there is no god but Allah.”
Allah’s Mercy will then arrive, with His Forgiveness, and it
will say, “I belong to the people of ‘There is no god but Allah.’ I
am the assistant of those who say ‘There is no god but Allah,’
and I am the lover of those who declare ‘There is no god but
Allah.’”
The Garden of Paradise is lawful to those who proclaim
‘There is no god but Allah,’ and the Hellfire is forbidden to those
who say ‘There is no god but Allah.’ Forgiveness for every sin
belongs to those who say ‘There is no god but Allah.’ Mercy and
forgiveness are unveiled for the people of ‘There is no god but
Allah.’”
According to a report from Abū Hurayrah !, Allah’s
Messenger ! said to Abū Darr al-Ghifārī !, “Tell the people
that if someone bears witness that there is no god but Allah, he
is entitled to the Garden of Paradise.” Abū Darr replied, “Even
if he is guilty of sexual indecency and theft?” The Prophet !
said, “Even if he is guilty of sexual indecency and theft.” He
repeated this three times, and on the third occasion, he said,
“Even if he is guilty of sexual indecency and theft – in spite of
Abū Darr’s disapproval!”51 As reported by Anas ibn Mālik !,
Allah’s Messenger ! said:
I have never ceased to intercede with my Lord, for He will
always accept my intercession, unless I say, “O my Lord, accept
my intercession on behalf of someone who says ‘There is no god
but Allah.’” In that case, Allah the Exalted will say, “This is not
for you, O Mu╕ammad. It is only for Me! By My Might, My

51. Reported by Imam al-Bukhārī in his ╖a╕ī╕ and by Imam A╕mad in his
Musnad.
276 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Majesty, My Clemency and My Mercy, I shall not put someone
who says, ‘There is no god but Allah,’ into the Hellfire!”52
There is an ╕adīth reported from Ibn ‘Umar !, wherein
Allah’s Messenger ! is recorded as having said:
On the Day of Resurrection, a man from my community (umma)
will be brought out in front of all his fellow creatures, and
ninety-nine scrolls will list the charges against him, with each
scroll stretching out as far as the eye can see. He will be asked,
“Do you deny any part of this?” The man will reply, “No, O my
Lord.” Then he will be asked, “Do you have any valid excuse?”
He will say again, “No, O my Lord.” Allah the Exalted then will
say to him, “You have a deposit with Me, and you will suffer no
injustice today!” The man will receive a slip of paper inscribed
with the words, ‘I bear witness that here is no god but Allah, I
bear witness that Mu╕ammad is Allah’s Messenger.’ Allah the
Exalted will continue: “Prepare to be weighed in the balance.”
The man will respond, “O my Lord, what is this slip of paper in
relation to the scrolls?”Allah the Exalted will say to him, “You
will suffer no injustice today!” Then, when the scrolls are placed
on the scale along with the slip of paper, the scrolls will be
lighter in weight compared to the slip of paper, for nothing
matches the weight of Allah’s Name.”
We will continue by exploring a fraction of the heavy
weight of this declaration, and with Allah is all success.
The Names of La ilāha ill-Allāh and associated subtleties
The gnostic endowed with intimate knowledge of Allah,
Sayyid al-╔asan b. Mas’ūd al-Yūsī,53 may his innermost being

52. Reported by Ibn Abī ‘Ā╗im in Kitāb as-Sunna, by Abū Na’īm, by atTirmidhī in his Sunan, by Ibn Mājah in his Sunan, and by Imam A╕mad in
his Musnad.
53. Imam al-╔asan b. Mas’ūd al-Yūsī (d. 1691) was considered a “renewer”
(mujaddid) of the twelfth century A.H. He lived in the Maghreb and was one
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 277
be sanctified, stated in his book entitled Minhāj al-Khalā╗ min
Kalimat al-Ikhlā╗:
You should know that the honored declaration (“There is no god
but Allah”), from the standpoint of the linguists, should be
called “the declaration of negation and affirmation” (kalimat alnafy wa al-ithbāt) because of its contents. In the usage of the
jurists and the legists, it is called the “the declaration of the
testimony of faith” (kalimat al-shahāda) because it consists of
testimony to Allah’s Singularity in Divinity, and because the
declaration of that testimony represents the beginning of
surrender to the Will of Allah (islām) for the human being. These
two points of view are mutually compatible.
As for the grammatically dual expressions kalimatā al-shahāda
(“the two declarations of the testimony of faith”) and kalimat alshahādatayn (“the declaration of the two testimonies”), they refer
to the words ‘‘I bear witness that there is no god but Allah; I bear
witness that Mu╕ammad is Allah’s Messenger.” This is because
true faith is not established unless the two are linked together.
According to the jurists, it may also be called “the
declaration of the affirmation of Oneness” (kalimat al-taw╕īd), for
either of two reasons: (1) It consists of the affirmation of Oneness
of Allah the Exalted in respect of Divinity, this being its explicit
meaning. (2) It comprises of all the subjects to which the
affirmation of Oneness is relevant, comprising three matters:
theological matters (ilāhiyyāt), prophetic matters (nubuwiyyāt),
and traditionally-heard matters (sam’iyyāt)
As for the Qur’ān commentators and the ╖ufis, they regard
it as having many names, which have been elicited from the
texts. The Proof of Islam (Imam al-Ghazālī) mentioned a
number of them, and later scholars have added to the list.
These names will be enumerated here, accompanied by the

of the eminent students of Mu╕ammad b. Nā╗ir, the eponym for the
Nasiriyya-Shadhiliyya order.
278 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
evidence on which the interpretations are based. And with
Allah is all success.
The first name, “the declaration of Divine Onenes” (kalimat
at-taw╕īd), has already been mentioned. It is derived from the
Qur’ān where Allah the Exalted says, “And your God is One
God. There is no god but He” (2:163).
The next three names are often grouped together. They are
“the declaration of surrender” (kalimat al-islām), “the
declaration of faith” (kalimat al-īmān), and “the declaration of
spiritual excellence” (kalimat al-i╕sān). They come from the
words of Allah the exalted where He says:
There is no blame on those who believe and do righteous deeds
as to what they may have eaten, so long as they are pious and
believe and do righteous deeds! And again, are pious and
believe! And again, are pious and excel in doing good, for Allah
loves those who excel in doing good (5:93).
As for His saying, Exalted is He, “So long as they are pious
and believe” – this has been said to refer to (the declaration),
“There is no god but Allah,” for this is the declaration of
surrender and pious submission to the Will of Allah (islām). As
for His saying, “And again, are pious and believe,” this is said
to refer to, “There is no god but Allah,” for this is the
declaration of belief or faith (īmān). As for His saying, “And
again, are pious and excel in doing good,” this is said to refer
to “There is no god but Allah,” for this is the declaration of
spiritual excellence (i╕sān). Indeed, in reference to His saying,
“If you do good, it for your own souls” (17:7), and His saying,
“for those who do good” (3:172, 16:30, 39:10), it is said that the
spiritual excellence (i╕sān) mentioned here means proclaiming,
“There is no god but Allah.”
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 279
The fifth name is “the declaration of mutuality” (kalimat assawā’). This name is derived from the Qur’ān, where Allah the
Exalted says: “Say: ‘O People of the Book! Let us come to a
mutual declaration between us and you” (3:64). This is said to
refer to the statement, “There is no god but Allah.”
The sixth name is “the declaration of the covenant”
(kalimat al-‘ahd). The name is derived from the Qur’ān, where
Allah the Exalted says: “…except those who have made a
covenant with the All-Merciful” (19:87). It has been said that
this covenant is the declaration, “There is no god but Allah.”
The seventh name is “the declaration of justice” (kalimat al-
‘adl). This is taken from Allah’s saying: “Surely Allah
commands justice” (16:90). As reported on the authority of Ibn
‘Abbās !, justice is the declaration: “There is no god but
Allah.”
The eighth name is “the declaration of truth” (kalimat al-
╕aqq). It is derived from Allah’s saying: “And those to whom
they cry instead of Him possess no power of intercession,
except someone who bears witness to the truth” (43:86). In this
context, the one “who bears witness to the truth” is the one
who declares, “There is no god but Allah.”
The ninth name is “the declaration of sincere devotion”
(kalimat al-ikhlā╗). This title is drawn from Allah’s saying: “And
they were commanded only to serve Allah, devoting the
religion to Him sincerely” (98:5). This is to say that the People
of the Book were commanded to affirm His Oneness by
proclaiming, “There is no god but Allah.”
The tenth name is “the declaration of truthfulness” (kalimat
al-╗idq). This stems from the Qur’ān, where Allah the Exalted
says: “And whoever brings truthfulness and believes therein,
such are the truly devout” (39:33). The truthfulness alluded to
280 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
in this verse is referring to the declaration, “There is no god
but Allah.”
The eleventh name is “the declaration of steadfastness”
(kalimat al-istiqāma). This is derived from the Qur’ān, where
Allah the Exalted says: “Those who say, ‘Our Lord is Allah,’
and then are steadfast” (46:13). The steadfastness defined here
is the declaration, “There is no god but Allah.”
The twelfth name is “the declaration of the fear (of God)”
(kalimat al-taqwā). This name comes from the words of Allah
the Exalted: “And He obligated them with the declaration of
fear (of God)” (48:26). It has been said that this refers to the
declaration, “There is no god but Allah,” because the one who
lives by it fears disbelief and the Hellfire.
The thirteenth name is “the good declaration” (kalimat al-
╙ayyiba). This name is defined in the Qur’ān when Allah the
Exalted says: “Do you see how Allah has coined a similitude?
A good declaration, like a good tree, its root is set firmly and
its branch is in the sky” (14:24). It has been said that this refers
to the declaration, “There is no god but Allah,” because it
stems from the heart and its root is set firm, thus signifying
gnosis (ma’rifa).
The fourteenth name is “the enduring declaration” (kalimat
al-bāqiya). This title is a derivative of the verse of the Qur’ān,
where Allah the Exalted says regarding the story of Ibrāhīm,
blessings and peace be upon our Prophet and upon him: “And
he made it an enduring declaration among his offspring”
(43:28). This is the declaration, “There is no god but Allah,”
because this verse alludes to his disavowal of what people
worship other than Allah. The declaration is also implicit
when Ibrāhīm says: “except for the One who created me, for
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 281
He will surely guide me” (43:27), for this (guidance) includes
the declaration, “There is no god but Allah.”
The fifteenth name is “the most exalted declaration”
(kalimat al-‘ulyā). It is derived from Allah’s saying: “And the
declaration of Allah is most exalted” (9:40). This is to say that
this affirmation, “There is no god but Allah,” is the loftiest of
declarations.
The sixteenth name is “the word that stands firm” (al-qawl
al-thābit). It is mentioned in the Qur’ān, where Allah the
Exalted says: “Allah firmly establishes those who believe, with
the word that stands firm, in the life of this world and the
Hereafter” (14:27). This “word that stands firm” is, “There is
no god but Allah.”
The seventeenth name is “the good statement” (al-qawl al-
╙ayyib). It is derived from Allah’s saying: “And they are guided
to the good form of speech” (22:24). The “good form of
speech” that is alluded to is, “There is no god but Allah.”
The eighteenth name is “that which is right and proper”
(al-╙awāb). It is derived from Allah’s saying: “They shall not
speak, except someone to whom the All-Merciful has given
permission, and who says that which is right and proper”
(78:38). He is indicating the one who says, “There is no god
but Allah.”
The nineteenth name is “the sincere religion” (al-dīn alkhāli╗). This comes from the words of Allah the Exalted:
“Surely it is to Allah that sincere religion is due” (39:3). The
“sincere religion” is to say, “There is no god but Allah.”
The twentieth name is “the sublime similitude” (al-mathal
al-a’lā). In the Qur’ān, Allah the Exalted says: And to Allah
belongs the sublime similitude” (16:60). This is said to be,
282 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
“There is no god but Allah.” It is linguistically synonymous
with “the sublime description” (al-wa╗f al-a’lā).
The twenty-first name is “the most secure handle” (al-
‘urwat al-wuthqā). It is derived from Allah’s saying: “he has
grasped the most secure handle” (2:256). The “secure handle”
is said to be, “There is no god but Allah.”
The twenty-second name is “the call to the truth” (da’wat
al-╕aqq). This name is derived from Allah’s saying: “to Him is
the call of truth” (13:14). The “call to truth” is said to be,
“There is no god but Allah.”
The twenty-third name is “the keys of the heavens and the
earth” (maqālīd as-samāwāti wa al-ar╓). Allah the Exalted says in
His Qur’ān: “His are the keys of the heavens and the earth”
(39:63). According to Ibn Abbās !, the keys are: “There is no
god but Allah.” Those keys include the key to the Garden of
Paradise, the key to the treasuries of the Unseen, and the keys
to the heavens and the earth. The most noble of them all is the
key to the souls, the bodies, the spirits, the hearts, the
innermost feelings and the minds. “Say: ‘To Allah belongs the
East and West. He guides whom He wills to a straight path’”
(2:142).
As the authorities have mentioned, the declaration, “There
is no god but Allah,” is called by many other names, including
“the greatest verse” (al-āyat al-kubrā), and “the success” (alfalā╕) to which the believer is summoned.54 It has also been
called “Allah’s safeguard,” “Allah’s fortress,” and “the cream
of the Qur’ān.” It is said to be the best part of the Qur’ān (alDhikr) and its tithe (‘ushr) or alms-due (zakāt). According to
Imam (Ibn) al-‘Arabī, in his treatise al-Futū╕āt al-Makkiyya:

54. The call to prayer (adhān) summons the believers by saying, “Come to
success!” (╕ayya ‘ala al-falā╕).
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 283
Because it is repeated thirty-six times in the Qur’ān, it is said to
be its alms-due (zakāt). These thirty-six repetitions in the Qur’ān
are the tithe of the orbits of the celestial sphere, by the
movements whereof Allah has brought into being the various
types of entities existing in the universe, such as spirits and
bodies, light and darkness. These thirty-six occurrences (of
“There is no god but Allah”) are Allah’s rightful due from all
things existing in the universe. They are within the very essence
of the human utterance of the Qur’ān, so they are like the tithe
from the produce of heavenly irrigation. “There is no god but
Allah” is the most exalted appellation, proven where Allah says,
“Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High” (87:1).
The tahlīl (the declaration that there is no god but Allah) is
therefore the tithe of the Dhikr, meaning its zakāt, because it is
Allah’s rightful due. It is one-tenth of the three-hundred and
sixty (degrees of a full circle).
Imam Ibn al-‘Arabī continues:
Know that this noble declaration consists of four words: the
negative particle (lā, “no”); the negated object (ilāha, “god”); an
affirmative particle (illa, “but, except”); and an affirmed Existent
(“Allah”). Similarly, there are four Divine essences which are the
source of the existence of the universe. There are also four
natural essences comprising the existence of material substances.
Four elements are the source for the existence of the vegetation.
Four humors are the source of the existence of the animals. Four
realities are the source of existence of the human being.
The Divine four are Life, Knowledge, Will and Speech, for
these are the source of intellectual and legal faculty. The natural
four (comprising material substance) are heat, cold, aridity and
moisture. The four elements (making up vegetable life) are fire,
water, air and earth. The four humors (comprising animal life)
are yellow and black bile, blood and phlegm. The four realities
(comprising the human being) are the body, nourishment,
sensory perception, and enunciation.
284 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
If the servant says, “There is no god but Allah,” in
accordance with this four-fold arrangement, he will be the
tongue of the world and the deputy of the Real in speech. Thus
the world and the Real will remember him when he makes his
remembrance.
According to Sayyid al-╔asan b. Mas’ūd al-Yūsī, may his
innermost being be sanctified, in his book Minhāj al-Khalā╗:
It has been reported that Allah says: “The declaration, ‘There is
no god but Allah,’ is My Fortress, so if someone enters My
Fortress, he will be safe from My torment.” The statement,
“There is no god” is not a fortress by itself, but only part of the
fortress, since the fortress is not completed unless “but Allah” is
added.”
He also said:
Every fortress has four basic elements, and “There is no god but
Allah” consists of four words (in Arabic), so each word is a basic
element. When its parts are interconnected, the fortress becomes
complete.
Just as the declaration has four basic elements in its outer
form, it has four basic elements in its inner meaning: namely, the
ritual prayer (╗alāt), the alms-due (zakāt), the fast (╗awm) and the
pilgrimage (╕ajj). It is itself the fifth, since “Islām is built upon
five (pillars).”
This declaration consists of four words, and the letters (in
the Arabic spelling) add up to twelve.55 Particularly significant
are the four letters that spell the Name of Majesty (Allah) which
occur in the declaration, because its affirmation is the purpose
and the intention (of the declaration).
The significance of this number “four” is truly remarkable.
The elements are four, there are four natural humors, there are

55. In the Arabic script, lā ilāha ill-Allāh is spelled “lām-alif, alif-lām-hā’, aliflām-alif, alif-lām-lām-hā’”.
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 285
four Scriptures,56 the Caliphs are four in number,57 and the
schools of Islamic law and jurisprudence (madhāhib) are four.58
Most of things existing in the universe have been formed in
a quadrilateral shape. The human being is a rectangular
quadrilateral, and so are most of the animals. Houses have four
sides, and so do doors. Books are bound in quadrilateral
volumes. Mosques are quadrilateral, and it is actually considered
reprehensible to perform the ritual prayer in any place of
worship that is not quadrilateral (in dimension). The directions
are four, and so are the winds. The degrees of nearness (to Allah)
are four, they being the degree of the Prophets, the champions of
truth, the martyrs, and the righteous. Human subtleties are four
in number, they being the mind, the soul, the heart and the
spirit. If four is multiplied by itself, the result is sixteen; this
number is the sum of the seven heavens, the seven earths, the
Throne and the Pedestal.
Most of the things in existence are grouped in multiples of
this number four. Twelve letters are the basis of the ennobled
declaration (lā ilāha ill-Allah, “There is no god but Allah”).
Twelve is the number of the signs of the Zodiac, and there are
twelve constellations that form the sphere of vicissitudes and
transformations, by Allah’s permission. The scholars have
devoted considerable research to the peculiarities of numbers
and the secrets of the letters of the alphabet.
The twelve letters (in the Arabic spelling) of, “There is no
god but Allah,” are full of light. If someone remembers this
declaration, his heart will be filled with light, wisdom and
right guidance, and its blissful grace will envelop him. As for

56. The Torah of Moses, the Psalms (Zabūr) of David, the Gospels (Injīl) of
Jesus, and the Qur’ān of Mu╕ammad.
57. Abū Bakr al-Saddīq, ‘Umar b. al-Khattāb, ‘Uthmān b. ‘Affān, ‘Alī b. Abī
Tālib.
58. The schools of Abū Hanifa (Hanifi), Imam Mālik (Māliki), Imam Shāfi’ī
(Shāfi’ī) and A╕mad b. Hanbal (Hanbali).
286 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
the declaration: “There is no god but Allah; Mu╕ammad is
Allah’s Messenger,” it consists of twenty-four letters.59 This is
the number of hours in the full cycle of the night and day. If
someone pronounces this declaration, any sins he has
committed during those hours will be erased from his record.
As for the number of different letters used in the declaration,
they are nine in number.60 That is the number of the nine
spheres encompassing the upper and the lower world;61 so if
someone pronounces it one time, he obtains rewards
amounting to the contents of the whole world.
The declaration (“There is no god but Allah; Mu╕ammad
is the Messenger of Allah”) consists of seven words (in the
Arabic). There are seven doors to Hell, and the son of Adam
has seven (main) body parts. If someone pronounces it one
time, each word will therefore lock one of the seven doors and
prevent him from entering the Fire.
Imam al-Fakhr al-Rāzī reported:
A man was standing at (Mount) ‘Arafat, holding seven stones in
his hand. He said, “O stones, bear witness that I bear witness
that there is no god but Allah, and that I bear witness that
Mu╕ammad is Allah’s Messenger!” Then he fell asleep and
dreamed that the Day of Resurrection had arrived. The man was
called to account and then condemned to the Hellfire; so when
they escorted him to one of the doors of Hell, one of those seven

59. In the Arabic script, Mu╕ammadun Rasūl-Allāh is spelled “mīm-╕ā’-mīmdāl – rā’-sīn-wāw-lām – alif-lām-lām-hā’”.
60. Alif, lām, hā’, mīm, ╕ā’, dal, rā’, sīn, wāw.
61. Islamic cosmology defines nine spheres of the universe, seven planetary,
one of the stars (comprising the Divine Footstool), and the last beyond the
stars (comprising the Divine Throne). This ninth sphere was added by
Muslim cosmologists to the eight Ptolemaic spheres of existence, and
“symbolizes the transition between becoming and Being.” See Seyyid
Hossein Nasr, An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines (SUNY Press,
1993), p. 236.
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 287
stones came and threw itself into that door. The Angels of
torment made a concerted effort to remove it, but they were
unable to do so. He was then escorted to the second door, and
the same thing happened there. It happened at each of the seven
doors, so he was then escorted to the Heavenly Throne, and
Allah, Glorious and Exalted is He, said to the man, “My servant,
you caused the stones to bear witness, so their rightful due will
not be forfeited. I am a witness to you bearing witness to My
Oneness. Enter the Garden of Paradise!” He promptly
approached the doors of the Garden, only to find that its doors
were locked. Then the testimony that there is no god but Allah
came and opened the doors, and the man entered into the
Garden.
The perfection of “There is no god but Allah”
According to Imam Ibn ‘AtBiyya:62
The religious scholars have disagreed as to which expression is
better: “Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds (al-
╔amdu li-Llāhi Rabb al-‘ālamīn),” or, “There is no god but Allah
(lā ilāha ill-Allāh).” One group has maintained the superiority of
the former because the affirmation of Divine Oneness (al-taw╕īd)
is implicit therein, since the expression, “Praise belongs to Allah,
the Lord of all the worlds,” comprises both an affirmation of
Oneness and praise, whereas the expression, “There is no god
but Allah,” contains only the affirmation of Oneness. In support
of their opinion, they cite the Prophetic tradition reported on the
authority of Abū Hurayra ! and Abū Sa’īd al-Khudrī !, where
Allah’s Messenger ! said: “If someone says ‘There is no god but
Allah,’ twenty good deeds will be recorded in his favor and
twenty bad deeds will be removed (from his record). If someone
says, ‘Praise belongs to Allah, the Lord of all the worlds,’ thirty

62. This likely refers to Imam Ibn ‘A╙iyya al-Andalusi (d. 1147), a famous
interpreter of the Qur’ān who is cited frequently in the twenty-volume Tafsir
of Imam al-Qurtubi (d. 1273).
288 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
good deeds will be recorded in his favor and thirty bad deeds
will be erased.”
Another group maintained the superiority of the latter
expression, because it repudiates unbelief, and people (are
inspired to) fight for it. In support of their opinion, they cite the
saying of the Prophet !: “The keys to the Garden of Paradise
consist of, ‘There is no god but Allah.’”63
After making this explanation his choice (in favor of the
declaration, “There is no god but Allah”), Imam Ibn ‘AtBiyya
said, “The decisive factor is the saying of the Prophet !: ‘The
best thing I have said, myself and the Prophets preceding me,
is ‘There is no god but Allah Alone, He has no partner.’’”64
Abū al-Walīd Ibn Rushd was once asked: “What is better,
saying ‘Praise be to Allah’ (al-╔amdu li-Llāhi) or saying ‘There
is no god but Allah’ (la ilāha ill-Allāh)? He responded that
saying ‘There is no god but Allah’ is better. His response was
conveyed to the eminent jurist Maymūn b. Mahdī, who wrote
to Ibn Rushd in verse:
I have just seen what you wrote, and you are not without arrows
In this controversy, though you have plunged into it with undue
haste
Your error lies in your lack of submission to the people of
knowledge
And the fact that people will follow you will be part of your final
reckoning.
So Imam Ibn Rushd responded to him by saying:
Gently! You have not caught me sleeping
So be careful, and listen if you can hear

63. Cited by al-Mundhirī in al-Targhīb wa al-Tarhīb, and reported by Imam
A╕mad in his Musnad.
64. Reported by at-Tirmidhī in his Sunan and by Imam al-Bayhaqī in his
Sunan.
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 289
You have transgressed my rights as if I were like those with
whom are acquainted
And in my absence you have met with a raging lion
If you had only handed over the religious sciences intact to their
owners
You would not be now in the throes of death because of what
you pretend
Contention is guaranteed you within any scholarly sitting
Without doubt, we have given you a drink infused with poison.
This should suffice for this matter. Allah is the Enabling
Guide to the straight path, and to Him the Exalted Glorified is
the return and final destination.
The supplication concluding the litany
The litany is concluded with the words:
“Verily Allah and His angels shower blessings on the Prophet. O
you who truly believe! Invoke blessings upon him and salute
him with a worthy salutation” (33:56). May Allah the Exalted
shower blessings upon him and upon his family, and may He
salute them with a worthy salutation! “Glory be to your Lord,
the Lord of Majesty, far from what they attribute! And peace be
upon those sent as Messengers! And praise be to Allah, Lord of
All the Worlds!” (37:180-182).
The invocation of blessing upon the Prophet ! and the
glorification (tasbī╕) of Allah the Almighty and Glorious have
been discussed previously.
Concerning the Tijānī Daily Office (Wa╛īfa)
As for the remembrances included the Tijānī daily office
(wa╛īfa), the plea for refuge (al-isti’ādha), the invocation of
290 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Allah’s Name (al-basmala) and the Opening Sūra (al-Fāti╕a),
have already been discussed in length.
Following the Opening Sūra (al-Fāti╕a), the next part of the
daily office (wa╛īfa) is the plea for forgiveness (istighfār),
recited thirty times: “I beg forgiveness of Allah the Almighty,
for there is no god but He, the Ever-Living, Self-Subsisting.”
On the subject of this remembrance, it is reported in the Sunan
of Abū Dāwūd and al-Tirmidhī, on the authority of Ibn
Mas’ūd !, that Allah’s Messenger ! said, “If someone says ‘I
beg forgiveness of Allah the Almighty, for there is no god but
He, the Ever-Living, the Self-Subsisting, and I repent to Him,’
his sins will be forgiven, even if he deserted an army!”
According to Al-╔ākim, this is an authentic Prophetic
tradition.
Al-Sayyid al-‘Arabī b. al-Sā’i╕, the master gnostic,
explained in Bughyat (al-Mustafīd) the reason for leaving out
the statement “and I repent to Him” from the wa╛īfa. It came
this way by way of the Prophet ! to Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī,
without the Shaykh having a choice in the matter. The reason
is that if the plea for forgiveness should be accompanied with
repentance, the servant will make himself a liar if he violates
his repentance. If he says, “I repent to Him,” but he is not
repentant for his deeds, he has become a liar. The (reality of)
repentance is returning (to Allah) with remorse. It is more
fitting for the servant to ask for forgiveness, so that he will
come to recognize his sins and have remorse for them. He will
become determined to never return to them, and so will arrive
at (true) repentance. The manner of the heedless in coming to
repentance is devoid of remembering (the meaning of)
repentance, unlike the coming to repentance of a person who
has joined himself to the act. The former method risks the
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 291
manifestation of deception and derision, unlike the latter
which contains sincere seeking for forgiveness. This has been
mentioned by al-Fakhr al-Rāzī in his exegesis of the Qur’ān,
for it contains a sublime subtlety that should not be hidden.
And Allah the Exalted knows best.
Let us mention here the Sacred Tradition (╕adīth qudsī)
related by Abū Dharr, on the authority of Allah’s Messenger
!, to whom Gabriel, peace be upon him, conveyed it from
Allah the Exalted:
Allah the Exalted has said: “O My servants, I have declared
wrongdoing unlawful to Myself, and I have made it unlawful
among you, so do not treat one another wrongfully! O My
servants, you are the ones who err by night and by day, and I am
the One who forgives sins. I do not mind, so seek My forgiveness
and I will forgive you! O My servants, all of you are hungry
except those whom I have fed; so ask Me for food and I shall
feed you! O My servants, all of you are naked, except those
whom I have clothed; so ask Me for clothing and I shall clothe
you! O My servants, even if the first of you and the last of you,
the human beings among you and the jinn among you, were in
the (same) state as the most righteous-hearted man among you,
that would not add anything to My Kingdom! O My servants,
even if the first of you and the last of you, the human beings
among you and the jinn among you, were on equal footing, you
should ask of Me, for I will give every one among you what he
asks. That will not detract anything from My Kingdom, except to
the extent that the ocean is diminished by a single prick of a
needle! O My servants, it is only for your deeds that I hold you
accountable, so if someone gains a benefit, let him praise Allah
the Almighty and Exalted; and if someone gains anything other
than that, let him blame no one but himself!”65

65. Reported in the ╖a╕ī╕ of Imam Muslim.
292 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Additional commentary on ╖alāt al-Fāti╕
Next comes the invocation, “O Allah, bestow blessings upon
our master Mu╕ammad, the Opener of what was locked, etc.,”
which must be recited fifty times as part of the wa╛īfa
(following the plea for forgiveness). No other invocation (on
the Prophet) can suffice in this part of the wa╛īfa. It has already
been explained at length, but it would appropriate to include
some of what has been related to us of its commentary here.
“O Allah” (Allāhumma): In the Arabic script, it is spelled
alif-lām-lām-hā’-mīm. The initial letter alif is a sign of the
presence (╕a╓ra) of Oneness and its manifestation, for which
there is no connection, no separation, no entering and no
exiting. Its utterance melts from full realization, because it
indicates the pure Divine Essence (al-dhāt al-sādhij), and the
source (‘ayn) of blindness and effacement. The two letters (lāmlām) are two hidden presences. The letter hā’ is the presence of
worshipful servitude, immersed in Divine Uniqueness
(huwiyya). The letter mīm is indicative of total immersion
(istighrāq) of pure worship in the Divine Uniqueness.
“Bestow blessings” (╗alli): This verb in the imperative
tense is an invocation of blessing that emerges from the
totality of the four presences, one by one. With the
invocation’s emergence from the first presence, it is happily
received by the next two presences, and so on through its
successive emergence through each of the two hidden
presences. The presence of hā’ is a secret that cannot be
divulged. With its emergence from the hidden presence of the
last it becomes a (complete) invocation, for there is nothing
beyond this in terms of capacity for expression; and it is the
secret that cannot be divulged. With the invocation’s
emergence from the presence of hā’, there are thus three
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 293
manifest degrees. So this is the rank of the true servant’s
invocation on his master.66
“Upon our master” (‘alā sayyidi-nā): The inner meaning of
“master” (sayyid) is a secret that cannot be divulged here. The
pronominal suffix, “our” (nā) applies to “us” in the sense of all
beings. The name of this rank (“master”) implies the one most
thoroughly immersed in the four presences, the link to the
presence of the un-manifested alif, the support for the Divine
Attributes. The invocation of the lām after the alif is the
absolute existence of the Attribute (╗ifa) upon what is
described (maw╗ūf). The invocation of the hā’ represents the
absolute unseen and total immersion. So “Glory be to your
Lord, the Lord of Might, free is He from what they attribute to
Him” (Qur’ān, 37:180).
“The opener of what was locked” (al-fāti╕i li-mā ughliq):
meaning the (one who opened the) manifestations of Prophecy
and sainthood.
“And the seal of what had gone before” (wa al-khātimi limā sabaq): meaning (he who sealed) the manifestations of
Prophecy and the secret. In other words, he is the one who
removed the veils, for he is the greatest veil (hijāb), meaning
his being sealed the essence (‘ayn) of the veil. Thus the Prophet
! is the confluence of all affairs and praises (ma╕āmid), so he
gave victory to the manifestations of Divinity.
“The helper of the Truth” (Nā╗ir al-╕aqq): He is the one
who helped or made possible the manifestations of Divinity.
“With the Truth” (bi al-╕aqq): In order to confirm the
reality of Divine Oneness (A╕adiyya); so he is the helper and
the one helped.

66. The reference to and discussion of the “four presences” is perhaps meant
to be hopelessly obscure for the un-initiated. Such concepts are meant to be
understood during the process of spiritual training (tarbiya).
294 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
“And the guide” (wa al-hādī): He is the guide by means of
Divine manifestation or revelation.
“To Your straight path” (ilā ╗irāt!i-ka al-mustaqīm): This is
the path that becomes apparent through Divine manifestation
or revelation.
“And upon his family” (wa ‘alā āli-hi): They are the site of
sainthood’s appearance (ma╛har).
“In keeping with his value and the greatness of his
extent in space and time” (╕aqqa qadri-hi wa al-miqdāri-hi al-
‘a╛īm): That is to say, in keeping with the value of his
Prophecy and his sainthood. His extent in space and time is a
reality that is unfathomable, and thus a secret that cannot be
mentioned or divulged.
O Allah! Bestow blessings on our master, the opener of
what was closed, the seal of what came before, the helper of
truth with the truth, and the guide to Your straight path; and
upon his family; in keeping with his value and his tremendous
worth. O Allah, care for me for his sake, for the sake of his
secret of alif, of truthfulness (╗idq), of mastery (siyāda), of
praiseworthiness (ma╕āmid), opening (fat╕), graciousness (lu╙f),
deputyship (khilāfa), precedence (sabq), victory (na╗r),
realization of Truth (al-╕aqq), guidance (hidāya), steadfastness
(istiqāma), proximity, value, worth and greatness. Amen, O
Lord of all the worlds.
The next portion of the daily office (wa╛īfa) is the Qur’ānic
verse: “Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of Majesty, far from
what they attribute. And peace be upon those sent as
Messengers, and praise be to Allah, Lord of All the Worlds”
(37:180-182). This has already been discussed.
This is followed by one hundred recitations of the blessed
declaration ‘There is no god but Allah.” The virtue of this has
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 295
also been expounded upon previously. However, let us
remind ourselves here of the following ╕adīth, in the version
reported by the author of al-Bughyat (al-Mustafīd) on the
authority of ‘Ibn Abbās !, where the Prophet ! said:
Allah (Exalted is He) will open the gates of the Garden of
Paradise, and a herald will cry from beneath the Heavenly
Throne, “O Garden of Paradise and all the benefits you contain,
to whom do you belong?”
The Garden of Paradise and everything within it will then
proclaim, “We belong to the people of ‘There is no god but
Allah,’ and we are forbidden to anyone who does not say ‘There
is no god but Allah.’”
At this point, the Hellfire and all of the torments it contains
will be asked “To whom do you belong?” It will say, “None will
enter me except those who deny that there is no god but Allah. I
seek none but those who do not believe that there is no god but
Allah. I am unlawful to those who declare ‘There is no god but
Allah.’ I shall be filled with none but those who refuse to accept
that there is no god but Allah. My wrath is for none but those
who deny that there is no god but Allah.”
Allah’s mercy will then arrive with His forgiveness, and they
will say, “We belong to the people of ‘There is no god but Allah.’
We are the assistance of those who say ‘There is no god but
Allah,’ and we love those who declare ‘There is no god but
Allah,’ and we are graciously disposed to those who proclaim
‘There is no god but Allah.’”
Allah the Blessed and Exalted will say, “I have declared the
Garden of Paradise lawful to those who say ‘There is no god but
Allah,’ and the Garden of Paradise has not been created except
for the people of ‘There is no god but Allah.’”67

67. A slightly different version of this ╔adīth has been provided in a
previous sub-section, in which the declaration ‘There is no god but Allāh (lā
ilāha illa ‘llāh)’ is explained thoroughly.
296 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
This portion of the daily office (wa╛īfa) is concluded with
an invocation upon the Prophet !, and the benefits of which
have already been enumerated. It reads, “Our master
Mu╕ammad is Allah’s Messenger. May Allah’s peace be upon
him.”
Commentary on the Jewel of Perfection (Jawharat al-Kamāl)
The invocation of blessings upon the Prophet ! described here
is called the “Jewel of Perfection” (Jawharat al-Kamāl). It reads
as follows:
O Allah, bestow blessings and peace upon the source of Divine
mercy and Lordliness, and the veritable ruby that encircles the
center of comprehensions and meanings. The light of all created
entities, the Adamic being, the owner of the Lordly truth, the
brightest flash of lightning in the rain clouds filling all the seas
and receptacles. Your radiant light with which You have filled
Your universe, encompassing all places of abode.
O Allah, bestow blessings and peace upon the source of the
truth, from which the thrones of the realities have become
manifested, the source of the most precious gnosis. Your
complete and straightest path.
O Allah, bestow blessings and peace upon the outward
appearance of the Truth, with the Truth, the most splendid
treasure, Your showering of blessing from You to You, the
encompassment of the mystifying light.
May Allah bless him and his family, with a blessing by
which You will make us well acquainted with him!
This invocation is recited twelve times in the daily office
(wa╛īfa). There is good reason for its inclusion among the other
invocations of blessings upon Allah’s Messenger !, since it is
distinguished by qualities that no other invocation can
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 297
possess. Shaykh A╕mad Sukayrij, the author of al-Kawkab alWahhāj, said about the Jawharat al-Kamāl:
Know that this noble invocation of blessing is equal in content to
all the wells of gnosis and secrets. Our master Shaykh A╕mad alTijānī ! received it by word of mouth from the venerable
Chieftain of Existence !. He told Shaykh Tijānī about some of its
excellent merits, including the fact that if someone recites the
Jewel (al-Jawhara) twelve times, while fulfilling its preconditions,
with the intention of visiting the Messenger, he will be granted
the special favor of obtaining the benefit of visiting all the saints.
Its fundamental importance is explained by our master’s !
saying, “Allah’s Messenger ! gave me an invocation of blessing
called the Jewel of Perfection (Jawharat al-Kamāl). If someone
recites it twelve times, and says, ‘This is a gift from me to you, O
Messenger of Allah,’ it is as if he has visited him in his noble
garden (raw╓a), as well as visiting the saints (awliyā’) of Allah the
Exalted and the righteous ones, from the beginning of existence
until his own time.” In another version, the narration is recorded
as, “until eternity.”
One of its special qualities is that a single recitation of it is
equal to the glorification (tasbī╕) recited three times by the entire
universe. Another is that, if someone makes a regular practice of
reciting it more than seven times daily, the Prophet ! will love
him with a special affection, and he will not die until he becomes
a saint (walī). Another is that, if someone recites it seven times or
more, the Prophet ! and the four Caliphs, may Allah be well
pleased with them, will be in his presence as long as he is
remembering it.
When one of the scholars, who was one of our master’s
companions, may Allah be pleased with them, came to hear
about this, he wished to confirm its reality. So he approached
our master ! and mentioned what he had heard. Shaykh Tijānī
! told him: “By Allah, if you were to remember it constantly
throughout your life, without any intermission, the Prophet !
298 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
would never separate himself from you in the entire course of
your life.”
The presence mentioned here will be that of their spirits and
persons in reality. If the veil is removed from those who practice
remembrance, or from some of them, they will surely witness the
Prophet ! in the state he was in when Allah took him away
(from his life in this world), and the same is true for the four
Caliphs, may Allah be well pleased with them. The Prophet !
and the Caliphs may thus be witnessed time after time.
Another of its special qualities is that, if someone diligently
persists in reciting it seven times before going to sleep, in a state
of perfect ritual purity and on a clean bed, he will see the
Prophet !.
This should be sufficient for you in regards to its excellent
benefit, worthy of any expenditure on the part of noble souls.
The Prophet ! is recorded as having said, “One of you would
dearly love to see me, even at the cost of everything in his
possession!” In the words of a poet, “If only He would favor
me with the sight of a face – a face that relieves everyone who
sees it of distress!”
You must view the arrangement of this litany (wird) and
the daily office (wa╛īfa) with clarity of vision. Then you will
realize that it contains amazing secrets, dazzling to the mind
and beyond the grasp of intellectual comprehension. One day,
I said to one of my dear friends, “In the daily office (wa╛īfa),
the human being is first denuded and stripped bare of
clothing, clad only in the intentions and the plea for
forgiveness. The Divine Essence then manifests itself to him, in
all its perfection, in the invocation of blessings upon our
master Mu╕ammad !. Then he affirms the Divine Oneness
with: ‘There is no god but Allah. Then he recites the Jewel of
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 299
Perfection (Jawharat al-Kamāl).” The daily office (wa╛īfa) is then
concluded with:
“Surely Allah and His angels shower blessings on the Prophet. O
you who truly believe! Invoke blessings upon him and salute
him with a worthy salutation” (33:56). May Allah send His
benediction upon him, his household and companions, and send
many salutations. “Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of Majesty,
far from what they attribute. And peace be upon those sent as
Messengers. And praise be to Allah, Lord of All the Worlds”
(37:180-182).
The excellence of the litanies and the shaykh al-tarbiya
Careful study of the Tijānī litanies (awrād) demonstrates that
they are the finest and most excellent of all litanies.
According to the erudite scholar al-╔āfi╛ Ibn ╔ajar,68 in his
Fatāwāt:
As for the litanies of the ╖ūfīs, which they recite after the ritual
prayer in accordance with the customary practices of their
method of spiritual development, they have an authentic source;
for al-Bayhaqī has reported, on the authority of Anas ibn Mālik
!, that the Prophet ! said: “That I should remember Allah the
Exalted in the company of a group of people, after the dawn
prayer until the rising of the sun, is dearer to me than this world
and what it contains. That I should remember Allah the Exalted
in the company of a group of people, in the wake of the
afternoon prayer until the sun sets, is dearer to me than this
world and what is contains.”69

68. Ibn Hajar al-Haytami al-Makki (d. 1556) was a prominent scholar of
Maliki jurisprudence and Sufism who authored, among other works, alFatawat al-╔adīthiyya.
69. Reported by Imam al-Bayhaqī in as-Sunan al-Kubrā, and cited on the
authority of Anas ibn Mālik ! by Imam al-Haythamī in Majma’ az-Zawā’id.
300 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
As reported by Abū Dāwūd, he ! also said: “That I should
sit in the company of a group of people who are remembering
Allah, from the early morning prayer until the sun rises, is
dearer to me than emancipating four of the sons of Isma’īl, peace
be upon him. That I should sit in the company of a group of
people who are remembering Allah, from the early morning
prayer until the sun rises, is dearer to me than emancipating four
(slaves).”70
As reported by Abū Na’īm, he ! also is reported as having
said, “Tranquility descends upon the sessions of remembrance;
the angels surround their participants, mercy envelops them,
and Allah remembers them.”71
Imam A╕mad and Imam Muslim both reported that the
Prophet ! said: “Whenever a group of people sit and remember
Allah, the angels surround them, and mercy envelops them.
Tranquility descends upon them, and Allah mentions them to
those in His presence.”72
Since it has thus been established that the customary practice
of the Sufis – meaning their general observance of the
remembrances and litanies – has an authentic basis in the
Sunnah, no objection can be leveled against them in this regard.
In a situation where their audible recitation may disturb
someone, especially someone who is performing the ritual
prayer or someone who is sleeping, inaudible recitation is
strongly recommended. Otherwise, they should follow the
instruction of their teacher, who combines the Sacred Law
(Sharī’a) and Reality (╔aqīqa), for he is like the physician, as

70. Reported by Abū Dāwūd is al-Sunan al-Kubrā and by Imam Abū Na’īm in
Dhikr Akhbār I╗bahān, and cited on the authority of Anas ibn Mālik by Imam
al-Haythamī in Majma’ al-Zawā’id.
71. Reported by Imam Abū Na’īm in ╔ilyat al-Anbiyā’, and by al-Khatīb alBaghdādī in Ta’rīkh Baghdād.
72. Reported in the ╖a╕ī╕ of Imam Muslim, and by Imam A╕mad in his
Musnad.
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 301
mentioned previously. He will not prescribe something unless
he believes that it contains a remedy for the sickness.
This explains why you will find some of them prefer audible
recitation (jahr), in order to drive away devilish whisperings and
carnal inclinations, to awaken heedless hearts, and to
demonstrate perfect actions; while some of them prefer
inaudible recitation (isrār) in order to discipline the self, and to
teach it the ways of sincere devotion, and to make it accustomed
to unobtrusive behavior. It is related that ‘Umar ! used to recite
his remembrance audibly, whereas Abū Bakr ! would recite
inaudibly. When the Prophet ! asked them about this, each of
them responded with the kind of explanation we have just
mentioned, so he confirmed them both.
Taking from multiple spiritual masters (mashāyikh) differs in
condition depending on whether the person desires blessing
(tabarruk), or spiritual education (tarbiya) and traveling along the
path (sulūk). The first takes from whom he wills unless there is
something to prevent him from doing so. For the second, this
(exclusive) affiliation is appointed for him, according to the
school of the sound Sufi people, in order to avoid the prohibited
and blameworthy things. May Allah gather us together in the
company of such masters! May He not start the disciple off
except with the shaykh whose state (╕āl) he has been attracted to.
Like this, the shaykh will have full dominion over the disciple,
so that his ego-self will vanish in the splendid state of this
spiritually-realized shaykh. So the shaykh will intervene
between the disciple and the passions and desires of the
disciple’s ego-self. At this point, the disciple must hold tightly to
the shaykh’s guidance, submitting himself to the entirety of his
commands, prohibitions and prescriptions. He will then become
like a corpse in the hands of the funeral washer, turning this way
and that as the washer wills.
If the spiritual state of the shaykh does not enrapture him in
this manner, the (first type of) disciple may free himself for one
302 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
more pious among the shaykhs, and one more knowledgable of
the rules of the Sacred Law and the Divine Reality. So he will
enter under his direction and prescriptions. This will lead to
success in the case of the shaykh of the first description (the
shaykh al-tabarruk).
As for the shaykh of the second description (the shaykh altarbiya), it is forbidden for the disciple, according to the Sufi
people, to leave him and go to another, even if his lower self
(nafs) should entice him to think that another shaykh is more
complete. In such a case, it is simply the right of his shaykh
which exasperates him, for the lower self wants to remove itself
from its owner into further error.
The best solution is to choose, from the beginning, the best
shaykh: endowed with the most gnosis, knowledge, piety and
righteousness. So after entering under the providential care of
such a gnostic (‘ārif), he has no permissible excuse to leave him.
Indeed, according to the Sufi people, the shaykh of spiritual
training has no license to let an aspirant take from him if he
knows that a perfected teacher is already causing him to tread
the spiritual path. In this case, the shaykh should command him
to return to his teacher, and let him know the right of his teacher,
to not let his lower self turn away from him even if it wants to
part with him for somebody else. Indeed, this (desire of the nafs
for separation) is the first evidence of his teacher’s perfection and
the truth of his path. Many of the ego-selves (nufūs) for whom
failure has been decreed, if they should see a teacher of strong
spiritual training, they will have an aversion to him, and heap on
him all sorts of calumnies and criticisms of which he is innocent.
The fortunate one will be warned against this course,
knowing that the ego-self actually desires nothing but the
destruction of its owner (the disciple himself). So he must not
obey it in refusing his shaykh, since he recognizes its most
insidious condition, trying to rob his good deeds of their
righteousness and his lofty goals of their acceptibility by the
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 303
Sacred Law. Whoever has the door of correctly interpreting the
spiritual masters opened for him, and out of modesty lowers his
gaze from their spiritual states, and assigns their affairs to Allah,
and devotes his attention to the condition of his self (nafs),
waging holy war against it to the best of his ability; surely it is
hoped such a person will arrive to his goals and find success in
his desires in the shortest amount of time.
As for the one for whom has been opened the door of
disaproval of the spiritual masters, of searching into their
spiritual states and deeds; is not this a sign of his exclusion and
the evilness of his end? Surely there is no success in this, which
is why it is said: “Whoever says to his shaykh, ‘Why?’ will never
succeed.” In other words, when his shaykh of spiritual seeking
(sulūk) and training (tarbiya) has decided on a matter, the
aspirant should put himself in his hands like a corpse in the
hands of its washer. This is to the point that if the aspirant
should have knowledge (‘ulūm), designs (rusūm), or works
(‘amāl), he should cast them aside and pay no attention to them.
The fire of truth (╕aqq) of the gnostic teacher makes manifest the
filth in order that you may abandon it. The goodness remains,
and the purity of the shaykh’s essence and the preciousness of
his kind is clarified. The purpose of volition (irāda) and the
appointment of an arbitrator (ta╕kīm) and their relationship is
that whoever wants to journey to Allah (al-sulūk ‘ila Allah) does
so at the hand of one of the arrived saints (al-wā╗ilīn), and Allah
makes it easy for him to know who is the shaykh. The aspirant
thereby may obligate his ego-self with obeying him, and subject
himself to his commands and prohibitions.
The result of this commitment (irtibā╙) differs according to
the spiritual master involved. Some of them command the
disciple with the remembrance of Allah. Some of them dress him
in the Sufi’s tattered gown (khirqa). Some of them do other things
depending on their ways, which are very many indeed, to the
304 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
extent it has been said that the paths (╙uruq) to Allah are as many
as the breaths of all the created beings.
The disciple shoud refrain from entering under the
providential care of a shaykh until his spiritual state has
overwhelmed him, or he has come to know of his understanding
of the sciences of the Sacred Law (al-Sharī’a) and the Divine
Reality (al-╔aqīqa). This is because the liars and pretenders are
many in this path (╙arīqa), although they have nothing to do with
it. They are betaking themselves to the Fire on account of their
evil deeds, the corruption of their conditions and words, and
their rabid pursuit of the ephemeral world and their rejection of
the everlasting Hereafter. Their only aim in calling to the
spiritual path is to gather the vanities of the world, to obtain the
tasty treats of the forbidden and to waste away life in pagan
ignorance and sin. So beware of their like and the deceit of their
words and deeds. Whoever follows them loses his footing, finds
regret and is prevented from arriving at the slightest degree of
Divine perfection. Allah will bring him the greatest ruin, an
exemplary punishment as warning to others.
You must yearn for the truth to be shown to you. Adorn
yourself with truthfulness and sincerity by making diligent
study of the I╕yā’ (‘Ulūm al-Dīn) of al-Ghazālī, may Allah have
mercy on him. Study also the Risāla of al-Qushayrī, the ‘Awārif
al-Ma’ārif of al-Suhrawardī73 and the al-Qūt of Abū ╘ālib alMakkī.74 These works are useful in explaining the states of the
sincere, truthful ones; as well as the deceits of the liars. They
contain the recipe for exalted character traits, the love for

73. This book has been translated by Qamar-Ul Huda, Knowledge for
Encountering God: al-Suhrawardi’s ‘Awarif al-Ma’arif (Fons Vitae,
forthcoming). In this work, Abū Hafs al-Suhrawardi (d. 1234, Persia)
explains various Sufi doctrines and practices with frequent reference to the
Qur’ān and the Sunnah.
74. The Qūt al-Qulūb fi mu’āmalāt al-ma╕būb wa wa╗f ╙arīq al-murīd il maqām altaw╕īd by Abū Talib al-Makki (d. 996, Baghdad) is considered a foundational
work of Sufi practice and doctrine. Al-Ghazali used it as a source for his
I╕yā’.
Concerning the Tijānī Litanies 305
poverty, the devotion to obedience, and the perseverence in
religious devotions, not only those in congregation. They contain
the means to remove oneself from the trivialities of people over
whom Satan has become victorious, seducing them from the
beautiful to the ugly, from the known right way to abomination,
from what is praiseworthy to what is blameworthy. Such
peoples have become drowned in the seas of lusts, of disgusting
doctrines, of wishful desires. And with all of this, they believe
they are doing good. What a fabrication they have invented!
May Allah provide us with the knowledge of the
imperfections of ourselves, and grant us sanctuary from the lusts
of the ego-self. May He sustain us with His good pleasure and
peace through every tribulation and affliction until we meet with
Him. Surely, He is the Bountiful, the Generous, the Kind, the
Merciful.
The Friday Congregational Remembrance (Haylala)
The remembrance of “There is no god but Allah” (al-haylala)
following the afternoon prayer on Friday takes the following
form: The plea for refuge in Allah the Exalted (isti’ādha), the
utterance of “In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the
Merciful” (Basmala), and the opening chapter of the Qur’ān (alFāti╕a), each recited once; the plea for forgiveness (istighfār) in
the fashion of the daily office (w╛īfa), and the Invocation of the
Opener (╖alāt al-Fāti╕), both recited three times; the
supplication beginning with, “Surely Allah and His Angels
send blessings on the Prophet,” recited once; and the
remembrance, “There is no god but Allah,” to be repeated
until the setting of the sun. This is the case if done in
congregation; if performed alone, the individual should recite
a total of 1000, 1200, 1500 – this being the ideal amount – or
1600 – this being the last of acceptable numbers. On the subject
306 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
of Friday, the Day of Congregration, Allah the exalted said:
“And when the ritual prayer is finished, scatter in the land,
and seek the gracious favor of Allah and remember Allah
frequently, for then you may prosper” (62:10).
Supererogatory Tijānī litanies and remembrances
As for the non-obligatory Tijānī litanies (awrād) and
remembrances (adhkār), which are innumerable, they are not
excluded from the principles of authentication that we have
established. Their source may be found in a text of the Sacred
Law, or a supplication (du‘ā’) in the Arabic language, the
meaning of which is clearly in accordance with an
unambiguous legal rule. The prayer also may have been
discovered through a saint’s spiritual insight or unveiling. The
remembrances of the Sufi people cannot be discredited,
therefore, except by an ignorant fool or stubborn critic. Allah
the Exalted has said: “And since they will not be guided by it,
they say: ‘This is an ancient lie!’” (46:11).
They envied the young man only because they could not match
his efforts
Surely the Sufi people have enemies and adversaries
Just as the co-wives of a beautiful woman speak to her face
In open jealousy and loathing; O how reprehensible a deed!
Another has said:
You can look forward to reconciling with every enemy
Except the one who is your enemy out of envy
Indeed, the blame of the critic is evidence of perfection. As
it has been said:
If I should show you the censure of my critic
It is surely a testimony to my perfection.
307
APPENDIX III
The Ecstatic Utterances of the
Enraptured Ones
n Latā’if al-Minan, al-Sha’rānī, the saintly pole and
scholarly gnostic, he who combines the Sacred Law with
the Divine Reality, quoted the following saying from the
Shaykh of the Sufi group, Abū al-Qāsim al-Junayd !: “One of
the enraptured said that he who remembers Allah the Exalted
will attain a state where, even if his face were struck with a
sword, he would not feel it. I was not convinced of this for
some time, until I finally experienced the matter to be just as
he said.” Al-Sha’rānī also said:
The majority of those who fall into error concerning this subject
are the authors of books of esoteric subtleties (kutub al-riqā’iq)
among the (would-be) Sufis who have not tasted the stations of
the spiritual path. They relate everything they have come to
know about a saint, without understanding the difference
between his initial stage, his middle stage, and his final stage of
development. They call everything they have not experienced on
the spiritual path a station of the perfected ones. But if one so
perfected were to study the books of these authors, he would
I
308 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
recognize their ignorance. If these writers had experienced the
stations of the spiritual path, they would only mention the
saint’s exploits in the final stage of his development.
I once heard my master ‘Alī al-Khawwā╗ ! say, “Since
Allah’s Messenger ! was commanded to ask his Lord to increase
him in knowledge, what do you think of everyone else?” Indeed,
the Prophet ! said of himself that he had been given the
knowledge of all the people of the earlier and the later
generations. So it is our firm conviction that Allah granted his
prayer, and gave him more knowledge than those of former and
those of later times.
This is to say, then, that the ultimate spiritual station belongs
to no one except the Prophet !. If you have understood this, you
will understand that the spiritual pauper who says, “I am
Allah’s servant now, (but) not for fear of His Fire, nor in hope of
His reward,” is simply a novice of the spiritual path, not one of
those who have attained perfection. So you should avoid finding
fault with him.
If the disciple devotes himself assiduously to the
remembrance (of Allah), making it his usual practice by night
and day, he certainly will recognize his veil. Then when his veil
becomes threadbare, he will recognize the remembrance is for
Allah’s sake, not for the servant’s sake. He will hear the call of
the Real, expressed in some form that conveys the meaning:
“Who is more wretched than someone who worships Me for the
sake of a Garden, or a Fire? If I had not created a Garden of
Paradise and a Fire of Hell, would I not still be worthy of bing
worshipped?” The servant thus will feel ashamed in Allah’s
Presence; ashamed to be worshipping Allah for fear of the Fire
or for hope of a reward. Indeed, no one should expect to receive
wages for another’s work, only for his own work.
The disciple whose veil becomes thin will recognize
therefore that he has no involvement in the performance of
deeds. He only is fulfilling his duty in accordance with the pure
The ecstatic utterances of the enraptured ones 309
Sacred Law. He will recognize, with clarity and certitude, that he
is like the instrument with which the Mover sets the immobile in
motion. Just as Allah is the Creator of the servant’s essential
being, He likewise is the Creator of his actions. This is similar to
the statement you hear, “There is no Owner except Allah, and no
one shares ownership with Him in anything!” This is a station
experienced by the disciple in the beginning of his journey on
the spiritual path. The person who says it is not laying claim to
this as the final station, as others may suspect. Rather this is the
first step on the spiritual path, where the disciple acknowledges
that ownership belongs to Allah, since He is the Creator of
everything.
In ‘Ibārat al-Minhāj, al-Nawawī said: “Understand that the
servant renounces all claim to ownership in the transferance of
ownership to his Master. When the servant has properly
acknowledged that ownership belongs to Allah Alone, his
appropriate station becomes abstinence from the world and
refraining from stinginess towards any of his fellow creatures,
except for a purpose prescribed by the Sacred Law.”
The servant’s conduct in this station would be like a person
who had a pile of gold stolen from him, but not one of his hairs
turned gray because of it. He would actually feel pleased with
the person who took it, for fear of the reckoning in store for him
on the Day of Resurrection (as to how he spent the gold). For one
at this station, Allah’s giving and His withholding are the same
in substance. The difference is only what is incumbent on the
servant himself, like contentment, for example. He does not see
himself sharing with his Lord in owning anything in this world
or the next. Even if the Lord gave him everything, he does not
imagine he owns it, except to the extent that the gift only was
given to him for the sake of evoking thankfulness. So he
detaches himself from the gift and attributes it to the Lord, the
One who owns the gift and himself.
310 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Al-Sha’rānī also said on this subject:
Sarī al-Saqatī used to say, “There is no difference between the
servant’s saying, ‘Allah has created me, sustained me, shaped
me, taught me knowledge and the Qur’ān, and made me a
blessed being,’ and his saying, ‘I am a saintly-friend of Allah,
and I am of the scholars who put their knowledge into practice,’
and similar statements. Indeed, every true believer is a saintlyfriend of Allah the Exalted: ‘Allah is the Protecting Friend of
those who believe. He brings them out of darkness into the light’
(Qur’ān, 2:257). The scholar never stops putting his knowledge
into practice, and he thanks Allah the Exalted for including him
among those able to do so. If someone finds himself absolutely
excluded from sainthood and knowledge, his thankfulness to
Allah must have been very negligable indeed.”
Imam al-Layth b. Sa’d1 used to say: “I know a shaykh who
has never disobeyed his Lord from the moment when he became
conscious of himself.” His companions used to say to each other,
“He must be referring to himself, because no one knows that
about another except by inspiration from Allah the Exalted.”
A man once touched the foot of Abū al-‘Abbās al-Sayyārī –
one of the men mentioned in al-Qushayri’s Risāla – so Abū al-
‘Abbās said, “Are you touching a foot that has never walked in
disobedience to Allah?”
Shaykh Abū al-╔asan al-Shādhilī often would say to his
companions: “You must publicize your devotion as a
demonstration of your servitude, just as other people make a
public display of sinful acts of disobedience. You should also
inform the people of the sciences and gnostic understandings
bestowed on you by Allah. These are some of the fruits from the
righteous early believers. The scholars and the righteous did not
applaud themselves boastfully or ostentatiously, far be that from
them! Their conduct (in publicizing what Allah bestowed on

1. Layth b. Sa’d (d. 791, Cairo) was a renowned scholar also famous for his
charitable giving and asceticism.
The ecstatic utterances of the enraptured ones 311
them) was based entirely on valid principles and purposes
consistent with the Sacred Law. So beware, my brother, of
hurried disapproval of anyone among the gnostic sages when he
commends himself. Do not accuse him of egocentric purposes,
now that you have studied these proofs and fruits we have
mentioned. Think well of their conduct, for Allah has
commended those who hear advice and follow the best of it, in
His saying: ‘Those who hear advice and follow the best thereof,
such are those whom Allah has guided, and such are men of
understanding’ (Qur’ān, 39:18).”
I once heard Sīdī ‘Alī al-Khawwā╗, may Allah have mercy on
him, say, “Disapproval (of enraptured ones) is not in accordance
with the Sacred Law, except when the matter is not open to
positive interpretation.” He also used to say, “One aspect of the
spiritual pauper’s perfection is that he has a favorable
interpretation of the speech of the spiritual dignataries,
recognizing their exclusion from deceit and egocentric frivolities.
Even if he is incapable of responding in their defense by
providing a plausible explanation for a statement or action
issuing from them, he must submit to them and refrain from
disapproval. In truth, the aims of the spiritual dignitaries are
beyond our minds. This is especially the case with the Imams of
independent legal reasoning (mujtahidūn) and their followers.
For example, how can you dare to refute the doctrine of Imam
Abū Hanīfa? !”
He also had this to say on the subject: “The reason for the
critic’s disapproval is sometimes due to his ignorance of the
technical terminology of the Sufis, may Allah be pleased with
them, and the lack of his experience of their stations. This was
explained in the poem, Tā’iyya, by Sīdī ‘Umar b. al-Fārid, as well
as in other poems. An intelligent person refrains from
disapproval, and assigns what he does not understand to the
general category of unknown things. Indeed, we have not
received any evidence that one of the saints, may Allah be
312 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
pleased with them, ever commanded people to omit the ritual
abolution, the ritual prayer or fast, or to commit any other
violation of the Sacred Law. The fact is that their books are
overflowing in obligating strict adherence to the Qur’ān and the
Sunnah. These books speak of remedying people’s moral
characters and their actions, on cleansing them of the
machinations and maladies that distract a person from sincere
devotion. They speak of enduring suffering and leaving aside
the infliction of suffering. They speak of abstinence and piety,
and on the fear and dread (of offending Allah).
“But it may be that this description (of ignorance of Sufi
terminology) does not apply to the negative critic. The gnostic
sage sometimes may speak, in his poetry for instance, in the
language of the Real, Blessed and Exalted is He. He sometimes
may speak in the language of Allah’s Messenger !. He
sometimes may speak in the language of the Saintly Pole (qu╙b).
A critic thus may assume that he is speaking on behalf of
himself, so will rush to express his disaproval. You must
understand this well.”
Al-Sha’rānī also had this to say on the subject:
A special characteristic of the Sufi spiritual path is that if a
genuine seeker enters this path, he becomes familiar with the
technical terminology in every detail, from the first step he takes
on this path. It is almost as if he himself is the creator of this
terminology. This applies only to the genuine seekers on the
spiritual path, not to the people in the other sciences. In other
sciences, the student cannot do without a shaykh to acquaint
them with the terminology of that science. This is the case, for
example, for theology, logic and mathematics.
As for certain statements of which some critics disapprove, it
often happens that some of these are inserted into the books of
saints or othewise fabricated to discredit him. According to
The ecstatic utterances of the enraptured ones 313
Shaykh Badr al-Dīn b. Jamā’a2 and others, this happened in the
case of Shaykh Mu╕yī al-Dīn b. al-‘Arabī !. His books, primarily
Futū╕āt al-Makkiyya and Fu╗ū╗ (al-╔ikam), were inserted with a
host of statements contrary to the literal meaning of the Sacred
Law. This also happened to me in some of my books.
Here is a relevant passage from the Legal Opinions
(Fatāwā) of the erudite scholar al-╔āfi╛ Ibn ╔ajar, may Allah
have mercy on him:
Question: What is the proper response to criticism of the ecstatic
utterances of the saints? For example, the saying of Abū Yazīd
(al-Bistami): “Glory be to me, in whose garment there is nothing
but Allah;” or the statement of al-╔allāj: “I am the Real!” Or any
such statement, where the words and gestures are subject to
disapproval in their outer form, but the inner meaning is true,
except in the opinion of those addicted to loathing and
stubbornness?
 Answer: As for the ecstatic utterances experienced by the
learned gnostic sages, may Allah be pleased with them, protect
them from denial and grant them acceptance, let the best light be
put on that which issues from them. The most effective response
to the critic is the one that silences and astounds him. None will
be guided to accept such responses except those blessed with
success, and none will turn away from them except those
doomed to failure. So beware of becoming one of those who sip
from the poisoned cup of disapproval and thereby instantly
perish. Make haste towards salvation from Allah’s wrath, His
hostility and His loathing, for the Prophet ! has related Allah’s
words, “If someone treats a saint of Mine as an enemy, I have
declared war on him!”3 And the leading scholars have explained,
“Allah the Exalted has not declared war on anybody, even those

2. Badr al-Din b. al-Jama’a (d. 1333) was a Shafi’ī judge and ╔adīth scholar.
3. This is a sacred tradition (╔adīth qudsi) reported by Imam Bukhārī and Ibn
Mājah.
314 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
guilty of grave sins: except those who criticize His saints and
those who consume usurious interest (ribā). And when Allah
declares war on a person, he can never prosper.”
Among the favorable interpretations (to give an esctatic
utterance), the best is that these words consitute an inspiration
from the Presence of the Real, an appropriate expression of the
lights of Allah’s presence they have witnessed. One of the
stations of love, worshipful servitude and Divine proximity
includes the prevalence of metaphorical expressions. So the
speakers are exonerated, relieved of the burden of sin.
Those who have relied on this way of interpretation include
al-Shihāb al-Suhrawardī, the acknowledged leader of the
exoteric and esoteric sciences. He said in ‘Awārif al-Ma’ārif:
“Concerning Abū Yazīd’s ! statement, ‘Glory be to me,’ may
Allah forbid that anyone should believe Abū Yazīd would say
that except in the sense of a litteral quotation from Allah the
Exalted. This explanation also applies to al-╔allāj, may Allah
have mercy on him, with regard to his saying, ‘I am the Real.’”
He went on to say: “The saints may sometimes be
commanded (to utter a declaration) in order to identify an
ignoramus, or to give thanks and speak openly of Allah’s
beneficient grace. This latter happened to Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qādir
(al-Jilāni). In the middle of dispensing wise counsel, he suddenly
exclaimed, ‘This foot of mine is on the neck of every saint of
Allah!’ He received an immediate response from the saints of
this world – as well as the saints of the jinn, according to some –
all of whom bowed their heads, submitted to him with humility
and acknowledged what he said. The sole exception was a man
of Isfahan, who refused and thus was deprived of his spiritual
state.
“One of those who bowed their heads was Abū al-Najīb alSuhrawardi, who said, ‘Upon my head, upon my head!’ Another
was A╕mad al-Rifā’ī. Hamīd was also among them, who said,
‘When Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qādir said what he said, Abū Madyan in
The ecstatic utterances of the enraptured ones 315
the Maghrib and I were both among them (who obeyed). By
Allah (I said at the moment of the pronouncement), bear witness
with the Angels that I have heard and obeyed.’ In response to
further questions, he reported what the Shaykh said and
recorded it in a chronicle. Shaykh ‘Abd al-Ra╕īm al-Qināwi also
stretched out his neck, saying, ‘The truthful one whose word is
trusted has spoken the truth.’ He was asked about his statement,
so he also reported what the Shaykh said.
“According to many of the gnostic sages mentioned,
Shaykh‘Abd al-Qādir did not speak except in obedience to a
(Divine) command that he should proclaim his saintly poleship
so that no one could disagree. It even has been reported, with
numerous chains of transmission from many respected
authorities, that the saints were informed, up to one hundred
years before his birth, that there would be born in Persia a child
of splendid appearance who would say these very words, so that
the saints of his time would be assembled beneath his foot.”
The following account was related by the Imam of the
Shāfi’ī school of jurisprudence of his time, Abū Sa’īd ‘AbdAllah b. Abī ‘A╗rūn:4
I entered Baghdad in the quest for knowledge, and there I met
Ibn al-Saqqā. I joined him seeking knowledge at the Ni╛āmiyya
college. We used to visit the righteous. There was in Baghdad a
man called the Succor (al-Ghawth), who only appeared in public
when he wished, and kept himself from view when he wished.
Ibn al-Saqqā and I went to visit him, together with Shaykh ‘Abd
al-Qādir (al-Jilānī), who was a young man at the time. While we
were on the way, Ibn al-Saqqā said, “I am determined to ask him
a question for which he will have no answer.” I said, “I am
determined to ask him a question, then see what he has to say
about it.” Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qādir said, “Let us take refuge with

4. Abū Sa’īd ‘Abd-Allah b. Abī ‘A╗rūn (d. 1189) was a prominent jurist who
settled in Syria. This story is related in al-Haytami’s Fa╙āwa.
316 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Allah from asking him anything! When I enter his presence, the
blessing of seeing him will be my only expectation.”
We entered his place, but an hour went by before we saw
him. Then the Shaykh (came and) looked at Ibn al-Saqqā with an
angry glare, and said, “Woe unto you, O Ibn al-Saqqā! You have
come to ask me a question for which I have no answer. This
question is such-and-such, and the answer to it is such-and-such.
I see the hellfire of unbelief blazing inside of you!” The he
looked at me and said, “O ‘Abd-Allah,have you come to ask me
a question, just to see what I have to say about it? This question
is such-and-such and the answer to it is such-and-such. This
world will surely immerse you in grief up to your ears because
of your ill-mannered behavior.” Then he looked at Shaykh ‘Abd
al-Qādir, drew him close and treated him with respect. He said,
“O Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qādir, you have pleased Allah and His
Messenger with your well-mannered behavior. I seem to see you
in Baghdad, where you have mounted the lectern and are
addressing the public, and you have said, ‘This foot of mine is on
the neck of every saint of Allah!’ And it is as if I can see the
saints of your time, and they have bowed their necks in your
honor.” He then disappeared from sight.
As for Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qādir, the signs of his nearness to
Allah became clearly apparent, and both the elite and the
common folk assembled in his presence. When he said, “this foot
of mine,” the saints of the time confirmed that for him.
As for Ibn al-Saqqā, he devoted himself to the sciences of the
Sacred Law until he excelled in them. He surpassed many of the
people of his time, and achieved great renown by outstripping
his competitors in all the sciences. He was gifted with an
eloquent tongue and a brilliant style. The Caliph regarded him
as a master of arts, eloquence and style, so drew him close to
himself, and sent him as an ambassador to the Byzantine
Emperor. The Emperor also came to admire him greatly, and he
introduced him to the priests and scholars of Christianity. He
The ecstatic utterances of the enraptured ones 317
debated with them and left them dumbfounded and
incapacitated. So he acquired tremendous prestige in the
presence of the Emperor, and the temptation he faced became
increasingly seductive. When the Emperor’s daughter presented
herself to him, he became excited and enchanted by her, so he
asked her father to give her to him in marriage. The Emperor
said, “Not unless you become a Christian.” So he became a
Christian and married her. Then he contracted a disease, so they
threw him into the marketplace, where he begged for his
sustenance but nobody listened. Gloom and melancholy
overwhelmed him, until someone who knew him came and said
to him, “What has happened?” He replied, “An affliction has
befallen me, the cause of which you can see.” The man then
asked him, “Do you have anything of the Qur’ān in your heart?”
He said, “No, not apart from Allah’s saying, ‘It may be that those
who disbelieve will dearly wish that they were Muslims’ (15:2).”
So I myself went to see him one day, and found him as if he had
been burned. He was in the agony of death, so I turned him
toward the direction of Mecca, but he turned toward the East. I
turned him back and he turned away again, and we continued
like this until, when his spirit departed, his face was turned
toward the East. He had been recalling the words of the Saintly
Succor, and had realized that he was being afflicted because of
his actions.
As for myself, I came to Damascus. There Sultan Nūr al-Dīn
compelled me to take charge of the charitable public
endowments (awqāf). I undertook their administration, and this
world thrust itself upon me with considerable pressure. Thus
what the Saintly Succor said about each of us had turned out to
be true.
This story, which we have mentioned before, contains a
very stern reprimand and emphatic warning to refrain from
negative critism of the saints of Allah the Exalted. The
318 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
negative critic is in danger of succumbing to this eternally
destructive temptation to which Ibn al-Saqqā succumbed, a
temptation (the end of which) is unparalleled in repulsiveness
and gruesomeness. We take refuge from that with Allah! We
beseech Him, by virtue of His Noble Countenance, and for the
sake of his kind and compassionate beloved (Mu╕ammad !),
to keep us safe from that and from every tribulation, by His
gracious favor and noble generosity. The story also contains
an incentive for believing in the saints, treating them decently
and thinking well of them to the fullest possible extent.
319
APPENDIX IV
The Aspirant Who Becomes Extinct to
Himself
e who has not attained gnosis should beware of
rejecting the words of an aspirant (murīd) who,
annihilated in Allah, becomes intoxicated and absent
to himself, and says such things as, “I have seen Allah!” or “I
saw nothing but Allah!” Rather this matter should be
entrusted to the consummate Shaykh, for he is the one to test
the aspirant. Indeed, expression of the spiritual vision (of
Allah) has become frequent among the Sufi people ever since
the time of the companions of the Prophet !. So let not the
blind man deny (the sight of) him who can see.
The greatest Shaykh, rare like red sulfur, Mu╕yi al-Dīn b.
‘Arabī al-╔ātimī said in Futū╕āt al-Makkiyya, chapter 351, page
227:
The various delineations (╕udūd) of the Divine Essence that
distinguish the Real from the creation are only known by the
people of direct spiritual vision (ru’ya), not by those of
metaphorical witnessing (mushāhada) or others. They are also not
known by reported information (khabar). But they can become
H
320 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
known as consequential knowledge, beyond the need for proof
(‘ilm ╓urūrī), as a favor Allah bestows on whom He wills among
His servants. Otherwise this knowledge is not found in the
Divine revelations (al-khabar al-ilahī); and indeed, there is nothing
a person cannot understand from scriptural revelation except
this knowledge. So a person can gain real knowledge only
through Divine revelation or the bestowal of basic, indispensible
knowledge (‘ilm ╓urūrī).
The delineations of existing things of all sorts are directed
according to the potentialities (of existence) within the essential
reality of being (al-‘ayn al-wujūdiya). As for the delineation of the
essential reality of Allah’s Essence (al-‘ayn al-wujūdiya al-dhātī),
the reality of its being is existence itself, and its existence is the
essence of reality, for there is nothing else in existence to be
known.
The goal of the gnostics (‘ārifīn) is to delineate the
boundaries between the whole of creation and Allah’s Essence,
the Compulsory Existent Being (wājib al-wujūd). But the real
knowledgeable ones of Allah (al-‘ulamā’ bi-Llāh) are above this
illumination (kashf), for what is metaphorically witnessed
(mashhad) is as previously mentioned (being inferior to the direct
vision). So the knowledgeable ones, may Allah be pleased with
them, guard themselves in this station, for (the direct vision)
may quickly leave their hearts. Whoever does not continuously
possess this direct vision (ru’ya), with each breath, he cannot be
one of the distinguished folk (rijāl).
This is the station of the one who says, “I have not seen
anything except Allah.” If he is asked, “And who is the seer?” he
will reply, “It is He.” And if he is asked, “Who is one saying
this?” he will say, “It is He.” If he is asked, “Then who is the one
asking you now?” he will respond, “It is He.” If he is asked,
“And how can this be?” he will say: “Affinities (nisab) appear in
Him, from Him and for Him; and there is nothing anywhere
except Him, for He is the essence of ‘anywhere’ (‘ayn thamma).”
The aspirant who becomes extinct to himself 321
So this was the doctrine (madhhab) of Abū Yazīd al-Bis╙āmī, may
Allah be pleased with him for his spiritual state.
He also said in Futū╕āt al-Makkiyya, chapter 374, page 464:
Allah has not made all His creation equal in knowledge of Him,
so disparity in this regard is inevitable among Allah’s servants.
The Mu’tazilites deny the possibility of seeing (Allah). The
Ash’arites consider seeing Allah intellectually conceivable and
thus valid from the perspective of the Sacred Law. The
philosopher rejects the possibility on purely rational grounds,
since he attaches no importance to the Sacred Law and faith. But
the people of Allah confirm the vision of Allah based on spiritual
unveiling (kashf) and experience (dhawq).
The author adds to this precious statement in chapter 331
of the same text, where he discusses the spiritual vision, its
possibility, means of approach and advancement within it.
After some discussion, he said:
Do not suppose that Moses’ request for the vision of his Lord
was an appeal for the vision of Abū Bakr al-╖iddīq !, described
in his saying, “I did not see anything without having seen Allah
before it.” Moses was not seeking this vision from his Lord, for
this type of vision was already bestowed on him (Moses)
because of the loftiness of his degree. Indeed, the spiritual
experience of the truthful person (╗ādiq) is not the same as that of
Truth’s champion (╗iddīq).
In any case, the vision (of Allah) has been established
beyond doubt; and this on the basis of spiritual experience and
traditional report, not logic. The vision of Allah is one of those
subjects that perplex the mental capacities.
After some more discussion in this chapter, he said:
Some claim (the vision of Allah) – with clear intention, sobriety,
and perfect awareness – in a public gathering, but only because
there is a need for them to say this in that particular gathering.
322 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
This occurs when they see that the Real has empowered them to
say what they say, and they have no power except His
empowering of them. By His empowerment, they are not the
speakers, for this power is the reality of the Real (‘ayn al-╔aqq).
He provides information through their words similar to how He
provides a servant with a witnessing that defies the ordinary. So
they say things like, “I am Allah” (Qur’ān, 27:9), and “Verily I
am Allah” (20:14), and, “There is no god but I, so worship Me”
(21:25).
Abū Yazīd was among those reported as saying things like
this in a state of full sobriety and establishment; knowing that
the Real is the One manifesting in the servant’s actions within
the substance of potentialities. So in some of his states, he spoke
as He, and in some states, he did not mention that he was
(speaking) as He.
Some of the gnostics said in regards to the disciple (of Abū
Yazīd) who considers Allah sufficient for him in his claim (to
have witnessed Him), thereby disregarding seeing Abū Yazīd,
that seeing Abū Yazīd one time is better than seeing Allah one
thousand times. (After the disciple was informed of this) Abū
Yazīd passed in front of him, and he was told, “That is Abū
Yazīd.” When his eyes fell on the Shaykh, the disciple died.
When Abū Yazīd was informed of his death, he said, “He saw
what he could not bear, for Allah manifested Himself to him in
me. He could not bear it, just as Moses could not bear it (when
Allah manifested Himself to him on the mountain). Allah’s
manifestation in me was greater than the Divine manifestation
the disciple used to witness in himself.”
Concerning the extraordinary claim (of seeing the unseen)
by the man with a reputation for righteousness, the author of
al-Mi’yār, the erudite scholar al-Wānshirīsī, had this to say:
In his commentary on the traditions concerning the
conceivability of the extraordinary, al-Māzinī related the
The aspirant who becomes extinct to himself 323
following story of a man of Qayrawān 1 known for his
righteousness.
That man said, “I have seen such-and-such and such-andsuch a thing from which the mental capacities recoil (from
describing).” When this was mentioned to Ibn Abī Zayd (alQayrawānī), he said, “Yes, his seeing this in his sleep in
admissible, for the sleeper may see even more than this in his
sleep.”
He was told one day that the man said, “I have seen the
Creator, Glorious and Exalted is He.” The Shaykh said, “This is
extraordinary indeed, but it is admissible for the human being to
see the Lord of Might in his sleep.”
When the righteous man heard that, he said, “I have not
seen Him except in the state of wakefulness.” When this
statement came to the notice of Abū Mu╕ammad (Ibn Abī Zayd),
he rejected it and composed a treatise criticizing the man. But the
scholars of Qayrawān discouraged him, saying, “This treatise is
a denial of the saintly miracles (karāmāt), and it constitutes
Mu’tazilite doctrine.”
My dear brother, contemplate the splendor of Ibn Abī
Zayd’s mastery of the Islamic sciences, to the point that the
people of the Maliki school of jurisprudence gave him the name,
“the Junior Malik.” When he was questioned for denying the
saint’s vision of the Creator, Glorious and Exalted is He, he
retracted his denial. And when the matter was referred to the
Judge Abū Bakr b. al-╘ayyib, the latter composed a two volume
work in support of the righteous man, entitled, “the difference
between the miracles of the Prophets and the miracles of the
saints.” He prefaced the work by saying, “Given the extent of his
knowledge of both the branches and roots of the Islamic
sciences, our Shaykh Abū Mu╕ammad would certainly not deny
the saintly miracles and espouse the doctrine of the Mu’tazila.

1. The famous Islamic university in Tunisia, which has the same name as the
major university in Fes.
324 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
All that his statement meant was such-and-such.” So he
proceeded to interpret his statement, providing suitable
explanations to solve his problem.
It is strange that the vision of the Creator, the Glorious and
Exalted, in a waking state is sometimes considered less
admissible than the vision of the Angels. This is more so the case
given the report authenticated by ‘Iyā╓ in Kitāb al-Shifā’,
according to which Allah’s Messenger ! saw Him in person, and
with his actual eyes. Since it has been established that every
Prophetic miracle could also be a saintly miracle, there should be
no controversy (about seeing Allah).
When commenting on Allah’s saying, “Allah! There is no
god but He” (Qur’ān, 4:87, 20:8, 64:13), the author of Rū╕ alBayān explained, “This is a sentence where, grammatically
speaking, the predicate belongs to the subject, which is the
Mighty Name (Allah). The meaning is that only He has the
right to be worshipped, none other.” It is has been related that
the glorification of the pole of the saintly poles (qu╙b al-aq╙āb)
consist of saying, “O He!” (yā Hū), and, “O He Who is He!” (yā
man Huwa Hū), and “O Who there is no God but He!” (yā man
lā ilāha illā Hū). When he says this through the spiritual state,
he is invested with the capacities of Divine disposal. And there
are three degrees belonging to the affirmation of Divine
Oneness (taw╕īd). The first is the taw╕īd of the beginner on the
path, consisting of the realization of, “there is no god but
Allah” (lā ilāha illā Allāh). The second is the taw╕īd of the
intermediate aspirant, consisting of realizing, “there is no god
but You” (lā ilāha illā Anta), for he is in a stage of witnessing, so
personal address is appropriate. The last is the taw╕īd of the
perfected one, who hears of the Oneness from the One who
affirms His Oneness, thus realizing, “there is no god but I!” (lā
ilāha illā Ana). This perfected one is in the station of total
The aspirant who becomes extinct to himself 325
annihilation, so nothing emerges (from his mouth) on his own
behalf. The Shaykh’s son said in the marginal commentary of
the Qur’ān, on the Chapter of Sincerity (sūra al-ikhlā╗):
The word “He” (Hū) is an allusion to the station of those drawn
near (to the Divine Presence), those who have considered the
essential nature of things and their realities wherever they are.
So they have reached the inevitable conclusion that nothing
exists apart from Allah, because the Real is the One whose
existence is essential for His own sake. As for anything else, it is
a potential existent; so that if it is examined from the perspective
of “He”, this potential existent is in fact non-existent. These
people thus do not consider anything as existing apart from the
Real, Glorious is He.
The following is a quotation from Ibn ‘Ajība’s al-Futū╕āt
al-Ilāhiyya ‘ala shar╕ al-Mabā╕ith al-A╗liyya:2
This reality of the soul is linked to the Holy Presence
It is only the receptacle that restrains it, from this (realization),
the ascension begins.
The “reality of the soul” here refers to the subtle spirit (rū╕)
that permeates the physical bodies containing it. The “Holy
Presence” is the eternal, ancient, subtle and hidden Sublimity,
which is given expression by the Angelic world (‘ālam al-jabarūt).
This was explained by Ibn al-Fāri╓ ! in his wine-ode (khamriyya)
when he said:
They said to me: describe it for us, for you are informed of
its attributes
Of course, for I do have knowledge of its descriptions:
It is the purity of the purest water, but without water
The wind’s subtle grace, but without air

2. An alternative translation of this complete work exists under the title, The
Basic Research Shaykh A╕mad ibn ‘Ajiba, by Abdalkhabir al-Munawwarah and
Haj Abdassabur al-Ustadh (Madinah Press, 1998). The book of Ibn ‘Ajība is a
commentary on a poem by Ibn al-Banna Saragossa.
326 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Light without fire, spirit without body
Its beginning preceded all existent beings
It is ancient without shape, present without form
All things began by it, but then because of Divine wisdom
It was veiled from whoever lacks understanding.
What emerged from the Eternal Wine was the (created)
objects (maw╓ū’āt) that became unveiled and apparent, which
Allah made receptacles carrying meanings. Among these
receptacles are the Adamic bodies, for they are the objects of the
Lordly secret, which is the spirit (rū╕). So the spirit is connected
to this Eternal Wine, but it is prevented from rejoining its origin
by the receptacle in which Allah put it to reside. The receptacles
are dense (kathīf), while the spirits are light (la╙īf).
Whoever allows his denseness to prevail over his lightness –
meaning his physical nature over his spiritual nature – he will
remain imprisoned by the things surrounding him, limited to the
confines of his body. Whoever gives victory to his lightness over
his denseness – that is his spiritual nature over his physical
nature – his spirit becomes joined to the Holy Presence,
returning to its origins. Neither the earth nor the heavens, nor
even the Throne (arsh) nor the Footstool (kursī), can veil it from
its Source. Indeed, one of the Sufi people said, “The Throne and
Stool are among my armor.” Another said, “If the Throne was in
one of the corners of the gnostic’s heart, he would not feel it.”
Ibn ‘A╙ā-Allah said in Kitāb al-╔ikam: “If the realms of the
unseen are not opened for a human being in this world, he will
remain imprisoned by what surrounds him, bound in the
confines of his body.” In other words, once the realms of the
unseen are opened for a person, neither the confines of the body
nor the existent entities can bind him. He will ascend to the vast
expanse of witnessing the Divine, and his spirit will be united
with the Worshipped King. This communion (itti╗āl) is known by
The aspirant who becomes extinct to himself 327
the people of spiritual experience (adhwāq), and denied by the
people of papers (awrāq).
‘Izz al-Dīn b. ‘Abd al-Salām3 provided an example to clarify
the matter, to open its treasures for the one who has not
experienced what the spiritually distinguished folk have tasted:
“Know that the heart is unseen, and the Lord is unseen. So the
Unseen (Lord) appears to the unseen (heart), by descending (on
it), and not by incarnation (╕ulūl).” The wisdom in this (focus on
the heart) is that the heart is a perfect creation possessed of both
an apparent and a hidden aspect. The apparent side is earthly,
lowly and bound by nature and physicality. It is dense because it
is turned towards the force of human nature. The hidden side is
heavenly, exalted, luminous and spiritual. It is light because it is
turned towards the exalted, spiritual, Divine, heavenly realms.
Rays of light are reflected in the heart in accordance to the
completeness of its facing the heavenly realms. The secrets of the
heavenly realms thus become manifested in the inner realities of
the heart. Such a person will see by the lights that have flooded
into his heart, and he will understand by the secrets that have
been revealed to him. So this is the meaning of “reflection”: he
sees the beauty of his Beloved in the mirror of his heart; and this
without limit or partialness, without incarnation, and without
separation or joining.
An example of this is a mirror with two sides. The back of
the mirror is opaque, and the front reflects light. The front of the
mirror reflects whatever is in front of it. Small or large, any
created being will find its image in the mirror, even though the
mirror is small and the object large. Whether a camel or a
mountain, the mirror will show all of the object’s parts. The
object is not thereby incarnated in the mirror, connected to or
part of the mirror.

3. Al-‘Izz ibn ‘Abd al-Salām al-Sulāmī (d. 1262) was known as the “Sultan of
the Scholars” of his time. He was a student of Abū ╔asan al-Shādhili and
Abū ‘Abbās al-Mursī.
328 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Likewise, when the Real, Glorious and Exalted is He,
manifests in the heart of the His believing servant, the servant
will see Him with the eye of his heart. He will witness Him with
his sight, without incarnation, partialness, connection or
separation. A clear indication of this is provided in the following
poem:
My Beloved graciously manifested Himself
What a great honor He has shown me
Making Himself known to me, until I became certain
That I am seeing Him overtly, without illusion
And in every state I see Him continuously
On the mountain of my heart, where He speaks to me
In this embrace, there is no union
And no separation, exalted is He from either of these
How is it possible for the like of me to contain the like of
Him?
How can the tiny star be compared to the full moon?
But it happened that I saw Him in the purity of my inner
being
There I saw Perfection, too mighty and exalted to be
partitioned
Just as the full moon shows its face
In the still pond, although it shines high in the heavens.
The Saintly Pole, our Shaykh al-Tijānī, Seal of the Saints !,
was recorded as saying in the Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī:
As for the (Divine) affiliation mentioned of the spiritually
distinguished, surely it is the closest of affiliations. Indeed, the
Holy Presence is the loftiest purity, which does not accept
contamination in any shape or form. If someone enters it, the
whole of existence vanishes from him, including his own self, so
that nothing remains except sheer Divinity (Ulūhiyya). In this
The aspirant who becomes extinct to himself 329
spiritual state (╕āl), the servant has no speech, no thought, no
illusion, no movement, no rest, no designation (rasm), no
explanation (kayf), no direction (ayn), no boundary and no
characteristic (‘alam). If the servant were to speak in this state, he
would say, “There is no god but I, glory be to Me! How exalted
is My affair!” for he is only speaking on behalf of Allah,
Almighty and Glorious is He.
It was in this context that Abū Yazīd uttered his
pronouncement while his companions were circled around him:
“Glory be to Me! How exalted is My affair!” His companions
were afraid of speaking to him, for they knew he himself was not
there. Then, when he recovered from his intoxication, and they
were thoroughly convinced of his sobriety, they told him what
they had heard from him. He said, “I was not aware of anything
of this. Why did you not kill me in that condition? If you had
killed me, you would have been warriors in Allah’s way, and I
would have died a martyr.” They responded, “But we could not
have done that!”
As we have said, the Divine Presence is the height of purity.
It does not accept any other, or any otherness. When Allah the
Exalted manifests Himself to the servant in the perfection of His
majesty, He causes him to die to all beings. The servant
comprehends no other and no otherness, so this is the utmost
extent of purity. When our master the Messenger ! of Allah
reported the vision of his Lord during the Night Journey (laylat
al-isrā’), he reported: “I did not see in the vision of my Lord a
single part of the creation, so I assumed that everything in the
heavens and the earth had passed away.”
This is the meaning of purity and nearness to the Lord.
Nearness (qurb) means to forget everything other, and all
otherness. In the first stage of nearness, all existence is at the
farthest distance from the Divine Presence. The one from whom
Allah has removed the veil of existing things, so that he sees
Allah’s nearness with his own eye, is the sole exception. He
330 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
becomes one of those witnessing Allah, while the rest of humans
are distracted from Him. People are distracted from the Creator,
Glorious and Exalted is He, because the development of their
natural inclinations (dhawāt) causes them to forget Him. Indeed
their natures are only dedicated to pursuing self-interests and
avoiding harm, so they become distant from Allah.
According to Ibn ‘Abbās !: “That which keeps creatures
distracted from Allah the Exalted is nothing but their
preoccupation with themselves. If only they would abandon this
preoccupation with themselves and distance themselves far from
it, all of them would behold Allah with their own eyes.”
The following citation is also taken from the Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī:
Al-Shādhilī ! was asked about the saying (╕adīth) transmitted in
some of the traditional reports: “If someone abandons
everything for My sake, by detaching himself from everything, I
shall manifest Myself to him in everything, so that he will see Me
in everything.” Al-Shādhilī said, “This is the method of the
common people, not the method of the distinguished spiritual
elite. As for the method of the elite, it is as if Allah says,
‘Whoever devotes himself to Me in everything, approving My
choice in everything, I shall detach him from everything, so that
he will see Me nearer to him than everything.’” The former case
is the description of the gnostics (‘ārifīn), while the latter is that
of the unique individuals (afrād). May Allah, by His gracious
favor and noble generosity, include us among them. Amen.
The following passage also occurs in the Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī,
on the subject of the ecstatic utterances (sha╙╕iyyāt):
Self-extinction (fanā’) and total immersion (istighrāq) in the
Divine sometimes happen to the gnostic unexpectedly, so that he
departs from the sphere of his sensory perception and
consciousness, indeed from all of his faculties and personal
existence. But sometimes, this passing away from the self results
from his devotion to the Essence of the Real, Glorious and
The aspirant who becomes extinct to himself 331
Exalted is He. An overflowing abundance of secrets descends on
him from the Holiness of the Spiritual Realm (Qudūs al-Lāhūt),
requiring him to witness his own essential being as the eye (‘ayn)
of the Real’s Essence because of his utter effacement and
obliteration in Him. It is in such a condition that the statement of
the Glorious One comes to be declared, “There is no god but I
Alone!” and other such glorifications, including, “Splendid is My
Majesty and Sanctified is My Grandeur!”
The ecstatic is excused for such statements, because his mind
– which enables him to distinguish proofs and benefits and to
classify the attributes of individual things – has absented itself
from him. It has vanished, disappeared, and become obliterated.
Due to this loss of the mind and the abundance of the Holy
Secret bestowed on him, the ecstatic speaks in the way he
speaks. The speech that occurs to him is created in him by the
Real as His delegation of authority to him. So he speaks with the
tongue of the Real, not with his own tongue, articulating the
Identity (Dhāt) of the Real, not his own identity.
Relevant in this context is the statement of Abū Yazīd alBis╙āmī: “Glory be to Me! How Sublime is My Majesty!”
Likewise relevant is the statement of al-╔allāj, “And I am the
Real, there is nothing in this robe except Allah!” Another has
said, “For the earth is My earth, and the heaven is My heaven.”
Al-Tustarī ! similarly said: “Behold! What a wondrous thing am
I for the one who sees Me: I am the Lover and the Beloved. There
is nothing comparable to Me.” There is also his saying, “I am
from Love, and Love is from Me.” Many statements of this kind
are attributed to Ibn al-Fāri╓.
So this is what is conferred on a person by way of selfannihilation and total immersion in the Essence of the Real. But
this is a matter beyond the scope of verbal description, and
understood only by means of spiritual experience and purified
spiritual states. Indeed, it is a reality known only to the one who
has tasted it.
332 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Sometimes the gnostic will experience annihilation and
immersion in the person (dhāt) of the Prophet !. He passes away
from his own self into the self (dhāt) of the Prophet !, becoming
privy to one of his secrets !. When his essence becomes clothed
in that secret, it experiences nothing but the essence (dhāt) of the
Prophet !. In this way, Allah informs him of some of the unique,
special qualities with which He has distinguished His Prophet !.
So the servant comes to speak with the tongue of the Prophet !,
because some of these qualities, which distinguish the Prophet !
and endow him with sublimity, honor and superiority in rank
over all the other Prophets and Messengers, have been delegated
to the servant. Thus the servant furnishes information with the
authority that the Allah has granted His Prophet !, although it
appears he informs only on his own authority. The person who
hears him thinks he is attributing the information to himself, but
he is only attributing it to the Prophet !: the servant has
absented himself from his own person.
When the servant returns to himself after his annihilation
and immersion (in the Prophet), he remains innocent of his
statements because his knowledge proceeds from the Prophet’s
rank. You must apply this standard to any of the Shaykhs when
you hear from them what amounts to a claim of superiority over
the Prophets and Messengers.
Whoever studies this carefully, with fair judgment and the
light of truth, will know for certain that the vision of the
Divine (ru’ya) is not a heretical innovation among this Sufi
group. Indeed, the most serious heretical innovation is the
denying a person’s claim to the vision. The vision of Allah was
never denied until after the first three centuries of Islam, when
heretical innovations emerged with the sects of the Mu’tazila
and philosophers, astray themselves and leading others astray.
The erring sects have previously been discussed. I have
embarked on the composition of a book entitled, Tab╗irat al-
The aspirant who becomes extinct to himself 333
Anām fī Jawāz Ru’yat Allah fī Yaq╛a wa al-Manām (“The
Enlightenment of Mankind, concerning the permissibility of
Seeing Allah in Wakefulness and Sleep”). Perhaps it will
provide a fuller explanation of the subject of seeing Allah.
Connected with this subject is the poem of our Shaykh, our
means of access to our Lord, the divine saintly pole, the eternal
inheritor, the ╔assān (b. Thābit) of our spiritual path, alSayyid Mu╕amd b. al-Sayyid al-‘Allāma b. al-‘Alawī, in
response to the misguided and misguiding deniers, for the
poem has not left anything unsaid:
The Visitor returned to me, silently, at the time of sleeping
The heart was seized, ceaselessly
By the lover’s remembrance of the Beloved, then He left
I spent the night after His departure without sleeping
I do not taste sleep, except a little
The bird of thamād drank the water of antimony
I spent the night prattling to myself that the destination should
be close
But alas! How far it is!
The distance and the fatigue cause me doubt
Since I had thought it was no further than the next campsite
Or is it the wind blowing from the South that makes me sad?
Surely the southern winds sadden the heart
Rather it is the fragrance blowing from the Beloved
With the Spring’s fresh air, air which can even quench the thirst
Reminding us of the dwellings of beautiful maidens
And meetings and appointments that have been held there
I will never forget the way these maidens pass in front of my
eyes
As if they have no purpose but to haunt me
334 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Toward me with great slowness they come, taking their time
They are discussing the highlands.
Indeed knowledge has become dead in these lands!
This epoch has donned robes of mourning
Its maidens of knowledge, before protected and veiled
Have fallen in the hands of the enemies
They have been humiliated, where before they were worthy of
fabulous dowries
Expensive, difficult to possess
Their deflowering has been licensed unjustly
By every depraved reprobate, even though they are decent
women
So knowledge became, after having been glorious and sublime
A toy in the hands of ignoramuses and scoundrels
Now the bald woman starts to demand
Expensive dowries of fine horses
Oh this sighing! How weak I have become!
Now my frailty is clear to everybody.
Among the ignorant you will find every dumb and blind person
Those who cannot survive without a dog to guide them
Clinging to the earth, unable to stand
Devoid of consciousness, deaf, like an inanimate object
And despite his incapacity and blindness, such a person denies
The vision of him who sees, the hearing of him who hears, the
direction of him who guides
How strange the criticism of this blind man for the holy person!
How can those who are asleep challenge those who are awake?
Is the sight of the afflicted the same as the sight of the liberated
one?
The aspirant who becomes extinct to himself 335
Surely the afflicted one is strained by perpetual chains
So they have denied out of ignorance
Things whose rules are clear for the people of principle
So the blind man denies the sun in broad daylight
Only because of his blindness, just as the sick man knows not the
taste of cream
By my soul! How distant are the veiled ones, those full of lust
From those excellent, distinguished beings
The one who gets wet by the seaside
Then claims to be the ocean –
He is nothing but a laughing stock
An example of idiocy paraded in the villages and towns
So they conceive of knowledge as the state they find themselves
in;
For all eternity, how great a lie is their illusion!
Knowledge for them is boasting and slander
Stubborn arguing
What sort of knowledge is this! Woe to your knowledge!
Leading naught but to slander of the saintly poles (aq╙āb) and
cardinal stakes (awtād)
Knowledge is not simply literature or rhetoric (‘ilm al-lisān)
Knowledge is having the fear of Allah in the heart
Indeed, the knowledge of rhetoric contributes nothing
To its possessors on the Day we shall stand witness (before
Allah)
A parable is of a donkey carrying books
No benefit do they bring, only suffering
If it is really knowledge you are seeking,
336 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Come to our spiritual masters (ashyākh), like shining stars they
are
In them you will find numerous oceans
Each filled, undulating with precious gems
Such masters have left aside beautiful virgins to seek knowledge
They have left behind carpets and pillows
So they have returned with profound knowledge
Flabbergasting their critics
Rich meadows of knowledge have they traversed
Untouched by the greatest of researchers
At first, they took knowledge from fellow servants
Then directly from Allah, Lord of all servants
They have come to witness the Real openly, with their eyes
So they are elevated with every passing moment
Whenever they desire, they expand on any science at hand
With continuous overflowing bounty and spiritual support
Such expansion cannot be contained by the seven continents
Measured out, nor can it be contained in the seven heavens
Each of their nights is like the Night of Power
And their days are like festivals of celebration (‘īd) for Allah
Were they to walk with their full presence on the earth
Whole lands would have been destroyed, mountains crushed
And against such people some dare to mount criticism?
What delinquent ignoramuses!
Surely the Lord of such saints has promised to wage war against
their enemies
And this is sufficient a defense against the arrows of any enemy
Therefore, beware of criticizing others as long as you live
The aspirant who becomes extinct to himself 337
Except for disbelievers, since you will face them with strong
proofs
O my Lord! Surely I am innocent from what has come from
people
Importing from other religions the evil of criticism
When the misguided mount their criticisms (against the
Shaykhs)
Witness that my own heart is filled with reverence!
And when the miserable ones cast doubt on them
Surely our love for the Sufi people has remained pure
Indeed! They are my family, and the carrier of my strength
My refuge against dismay on the Day of Reckoning.
338
APPENDIX V
The Vision of Allah within the Realm
of Possibility
he substance of the issue is that the vision of Allah with
the eyes, today in this world, is conceivable, even if it
has not been legally demonstrated. As for the vision by
means of spiritual insight (ba╗īra), experience (dhawq), and
unveiling (kashf), its occurrence is an indisputable fact. The
expressions of the Sufi people differ concerning the vision of
Allah. Some express it as not seeing any existence (wujūd)
aside from the Real. Others say it means self-annihilation
(fanā’), or others express it as the arrival in the Divine Presence
(wu╗ūl). Some say it means union with the Divine (jam’). In the
words of a poet:
Our expressions are diverse, but You have one meaning
And everything points to this Perfection.
Imam al-Sha’rānī said in al-Durar:
I asked my brother Af╓al al-Dīn1 ! about the words of Allah the

1. Af╓al al-Dīn was a prominent Sufi in the time of Sha’rānī whom the latter
believed was one of the arbab al-ahwal (“masters of spiritual states”). See
T
The Vision of Allah within the Realm of Possibility 339
Exalted concerning Moses !: “He said, ‘My Lord, show
(Yourself) to me, so that I may look at You’” (Qur’ān, 7:143). I
asked, how could Moses ask to see Allah in this world, when
Allah’s Messenger ! said, “No one will see his Lord until he
dies”2? I asked, is there a stage in the mission of Prophethood
(risāla) in which a Messenger requests to see Allah in this world?
If there is no such request, is the saying of the Prophet !, “No
one will see his Lord until he dies,” a general or a limited
negation?
To this, he ! replied: “When Shaykh Mu╕yī al-Dīn (Ibn al-
‘Arabī) ! was asked such questions, he said, ‘No Messenger is
ignorant of this (matter).’ Nothing remains to say, therefore,
except that there is indeed a stage in the mission of Prophethood
where the Messenger asks to see Allah in this world. The saying
of the Prophet ! is thus a general negation. Indeed, Moses !
did not see Allah the Exalted until he fell down in a swoon,
lifeless. Then he saw Him in his swoon.”
I asked, “In a state of death?” He replied, “Yes, in a state of
death, as he ! was informed when he met with Him by means of
spiritual unveiling (al-kashf al-rū╕ānī).
Then I said to him, “Our Prophet ! was uncertain about the
spiritual state of Moses, for he said: ‘I am the first of those from
over whom the earth will be split asunder (at the Day of
Resurrection), so I shall look out, and there will be Moses,
clinging to the foot of the Heavenly Throne. But I do not know if
this immunity from being stunned by the blast of the trumpet
will be his reward for having swooned on the mountain, or
whether he is simply one of those to whom Allah gave
exemption (from the blast).”3

Michael Winter, Society & Religion in Early Ottoman Egypt: Studies in the
Writings of ‘Abd al-Wahhab al-Sha’rani (Transaction Publishers, 2006), p. 90.
2. Reported by Imam Muslim in his ╖a╕ī╕, and by Imam al-Tirmidhī in his
Sunan.
3. Reported by Imam Bukhārī in his ╖a╕ī╕, and by Imam A╕mad in his
Musnad. The version in Bukhārī is contextualized by an argument between a
340 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
To this, Af╓al al-Dīn ! replied, “This saying of his ! was
uttered before Allah the Exalted informed him that Moses !
was rewarded for the swooning he experienced when the
mountain collapsed. Moses did not see Allah until he passed
away and then, when he recovered from consciousness, he
recognized Whom he had seen and the sight of Him caused him
to live for all eternity. That is why he said, “I turn to You in
repentance” (Qur’ān, 7:143), for there was nothing for him to
return to except Allah.
“He used to see Allah before he experienced this special
vision of Him, but without realizing that it was Allah he was
seeing. When the situation changed, Moses saw Him while
recognizing Whom he was seeing. This is what distinguished
him from others, since others see Him without realizing that
they are seeing Him. If it is in your heart to meet someone that
you do not know with your eyes, when he meets you and greets
you, you will not recognize him. So you have seen this person,
but you did not see him.”
I then said to him, “Allah the Exalted transformed Moses !
with the experience on the mountain, but he said that He
revealed Himself to the mountain and not to Moses.” Af╓al !
replied, “He did reveal Himself to the mountain; and since
nothing (in the vicinity) could withstand His revelation,
transformation was inevitable. So the mountain crumbled and
Moses swooned. The One who caused the mountain to crumble
for Moses was the One who caused him to swoon.”
I then asked him, “Why was Moses returned to his natural
form, but the mountain did not return to its original form after
being crumbled to dust?” He ! said, ‘The identity of the
mountain ceased to exist because it was devoid of the spirit
(rū╕). In the case of Moses !, on the other hand, his natural
form and his identity did not cease to exist, even when he fell

Muslim and a Jew concerning the relative merits of Mu╕ammad and Moses.
A similar version of the above was Mu╕ammad’s answer.
The Vision of Allah within the Realm of Possibility 341
down swooning, because he was endowed with a spirit. His
spirit clung to his form as it had been, whereas the mountain did
not return to being a mountain because it did not have a spirit to
cling to its form.”
I then asked him, “What about the witnessing (shuhūd) of
which the Sufis speak? Is it synonymous with seeing (ru’ya), or
does it imply something else?”
To this, he ! replied, “Witnessing is not the same as seeing.
The difference between them is that seeing (ru’ya) is not
preceeded by knowledge of that which is seen, whereas
witnessing (shuhūd) is preceded by knowledge of that which is
witnessed (mashhūd), meaning that which is designated by the
articles of faith (‘aqā’id). This is why both confirmation and
negation apply to witnessing of the otherworldly manifestation.
But the vision is subject only to confirmation. One who witnesses
is not called a witness unless he witnesses what he sees with
belief and soundness.”
I said to him, “With what did Moses hear the words of
Allah?”
He said, “With his hearing.”
I asked, “What did he hear then?”
He said, “In this regard, he was with the generality of people
experiencing spiritual unveiling.”
I asked him, “Then with what was he accorded special
privilege?”
He said, “With the spiritual experience (dhawq) in this
(hearing), which no one knows except him who experiences it.”
I asked him, “Are all the possessors of spiritual experience
like this?”
He said: “Yes, but the spiritual experience is according to
degrees; and from this perspective, Moses was specially honored.
It was to him that the Prophet Mu╕ammad ! returned during the
Night Journey to discuss the affair of the ritual prayer;4 and this

4. According to the traditional account of the Prophet Mu╕ammad’s Night
342 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
was on account of the spiritual experience of Moses. So this (sort
of spiritual experience) was among the tribe of Israel before our
Prophet !. Surely the spiritual experience is a state not realized
except through the experience itself; and this simply emerges from
the hearts of those endowed with spiritual experience.”
I said to him, “The leading figures of the Mu’tazila have
denied the possibility of seeing Allah the Exalted in this world
and the Hereafter, apart from what has been related in the
Qur’ānic verses and the traditional reports (a╕ādīth).” He ! then
said, “Their denial is correct, because no one ever sees the Lord
of Truth except from behind the cloak of Supreme Greatness
(kibriyā’), as related in the saying of the Prophet ! concerning the
manifestation of the Lord of Truth in the Gardens of Eden,
‘There is nothing over the Face of Allah the Exalted except the
cloak of Supreme Greatness (kibriyā’).’ The ‘face’ (wajh) of a thing
is its essence (dhāt), so the meaning is that a veil is always
present between you and Him, preventing the sight from
reaching Him. Allah the Exalted spoke the truth in His saying to
Moses: ‘You will not see Me’ (Qur’ān, 7:143). The eyes reach only
as far as the cloak. This is the standpoint of the leading figures of
the Mu’tazila. As for the majority of their followers, they have
adopted the superficial view of the matter, and denied the
possibility of seeing Allah absolutely, so they have contravened
the Sacred Law (Sharī’a) and been mistaken.”
Ibn al-Zayātī said in Farā’id al-Fawā’id:5
There are two types of sainthood: minor and major. Where the
minor type is concerned, it means that the servant devotes
himself to his Lord by making a dedicated practice of obedience

Journey and Ascension, Allah commissioned the Prophet with fifty prayers
for his community each day. It was successive discussions with Moses that
convinced the Prophet to return to Allah and ask Him to decrease the
amount, eventually to five.
5. This may be the Farā’id al-Fawā’id fī Bayān al-Aqā’id (first published in
Istanbul, 1804), by A╕mad b. Mu╕ammad al-Amin Istanbuli. The book
concerns the basic tenets of the Muslim religion.
The Vision of Allah within the Realm of Possibility 343
to Him, abstinence from the causes of His displeasure,
compliance with the commandments, avoidance of the
prohibitions, striving to control the senses, and endeavouring to
regulate the breathing. As for the major type, it means that Allah
the Exalted befriends His servant by ridding his heart of
everything apart from Himself, and holding him so close to Him
that he sees nothing but Allah. If he tried to direct his attention
toward anything other than Him, he would find it impossible to
do so. It is inconceivable, of course, that he would ever attempt
to do so; taking notice of something would cause awareness to
be divided, and he has no awareness of anything other than the
One who is the object of his quest and ardent yearning. This
(state) will be attained by all of those endowed with the major
sainthood, if Allah wills. As for those endowed with the minor
sainthood, (this state) may be attained by some of them, but not
by all.
By all of this, you should know that the opinion of those
who maintain that seeing Allah (ru’ya) is impossible, except in
the case of the Seal of the Prophets !, is a false opinion. It can
only be held by someone who is ignorant of the formulations
of words and their meanings. If something is impossible, it can
never come into existence; it cannot happen to anyone,
because the occurrence of the impossible is an absurdity that
necessarily requires the distortion of the facts of reality. Know
that nothing is impossible for Allah the Glorious, except any
form of partnership with Him. He is Tremendously Exalted far
beyond such an ascription. Other than that, the impossibilities
discussed by the scholars of theology include an accidental or
non-essential impossibility (musta╕īl ‘ara╓ī). For example, it
was not impossible for Allah to send another Messenger after
Mu╕ammad !, either like him or better than him, but His Will
344 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
was not connected to this, so it became an accidental
impossibility. According to al-Mi’yār:
The Grand-Judge in Tunis, Abū ‘Abd-Allah Mu╕ammad b. ‘Abd
al-Salām, was asked: “Is it possible, in terms of capability, for
Allah the Exalted to create someone more excellent than our
Prophet Mu╕ammad !?” To this, he replied, “It is possible in
terms of capability, but it did not happen.” That came to the
attention of one of his contemporaries among the scholars of
Tunis, the righteous jurist Shaykh Abū al-╔asan b. al-Munta╗ir,
may Allah bestow His mercy upon him. So he wrote to Ibn ‘Abd
al-Salām, “O Mu╕ammad, if only your mother had not given
birth to you! Since she did give birth to you, if only you had not
acquired knowledge! Since you did acquire knowledge, if only
you had not spoken!” It is said that Ibn ‘Abd al-Salām withdrew
from this discussion, saying, “What have the Sufi recluses
(murābi╙ūn) to do with meddling in this unnecessary issue,” as
the question had been attributed to the righteous Shaykh Abū
Mu╕ammad ‘Abd al-Hādī al-╖ūfī, may Allah bestow His mercy
upon him.”
According to al-Khatīb Abū Sa’īd al-Shilwī:
The correct response (to the question mentioned above) is this:
“Capacity is relevant only to possibilities. As for the
inconceivable, it cannot be defined in terms of capability or
incapacity. Since Allah created the Prophet ! as the most
excellent of human beings, it is inconceivable that anyone might
be more excellent than him.”
According to al-Wānsharīsī,6
One of the scholars has said, “The protest of the remonstrator
against Ibn ‘Abd al-Salām is a shortcoming, an unjust assault
against him, and a criticism of his answer that has been made

6 . A╕mad b. Ya╕yā al-Wānsharīsī al-Tilimsānī, also pronounced
Wānsharīshī (d. 1508), was a North African scholar of the Maliki school. He
is the author of Kitāb al-Mi’yār, a collection of legal rulings.
The Vision of Allah within the Realm of Possibility 345
without careful consideration, because the matter is
controversial.”
The erudite scholar, the judge, Shaykh Abū ‘Uthmān Sa’īd
al-‘Aqabānī said in his commentary of al-‘Aqīda al-Burhāniyya:7
Know that something that has been possible in itself, should the
command appear (to the contrary), may become inconceivable
(mu╕āl). For example: the belief of Abū Jahl8 was possible in
itself, but once Allah’s decree concerning its non-existence
became known, from this perspective, it became inconceivable.
So in cases such as these: does the capacity (qudra) hinge on the
possibility in itself, or not; since preordained knowledge (al-‘ilm
al-qadīm) decided on that particular thing’s inconceivability?
There is difference of opinion concerning this issue. Al-Ghazālī
answered the two statements in the affirmative, that the meaning
of the first statement was that something’s occurence, in its
essence, hinged on its capacity. The meaning of the second
statement has to do with something’s occurence hinging on the
knowledge that it will not happen. But the condition that
something will not occur does not remove it from the realm of
capacity. The explanation of this is that capacity does not hinge
on what is inconceivable, nor does it hinge on what is necessary.
It is as if Allah knows that something will not happen, so from
this perspective its occurence is impossible. So too, when Allah
knows something will happen, its occurence becomes obligatory
from this perspective. But if His knowledge of something’s nonoccurence should remove it from the realm of possibility,
everything would become an obligated occurence (and therefore

7. This is al-‘Aqīda al-Burhāniyya by the Moroccan scholar Abū Amr Salaji alU╗ūlī (d. 1149, Fes).
8. Abū Jahl (the “father of ignorance”) was the nickname for Amr b. Hisham
(d. 624), one the Meccan leaders foremost in torturing and humiliating early
converts to Islam in Mecca. At one point, the Prophet had prayed that Allah
strengthen Islam with the conversion of either Umar b. al-Kha╙╙āb or Abū
Jahl.
346 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
removed from the realm of capacity). So something’s occurence
thus depends on its occurence or lack of occurence in Allah’s
knowledge (not on capacity alone). So it is necessary that
capacity not remain bound by the final decision, far Exalted is
Allah from that!
It is apparent from the words of the Shaykh there there is
dispute and difference of opinion on this issue between the
theologians. The Shaykh considered it more beneficial to
consider the capacity of an occurence, and this was also the
answer of Shaykh Ibn ‘Abd al-Salām, may Allah have mercy
on him. If you contemplate all of this, it will become apparent
to you the correctness of his answer, may Allah have mercy on
him, as well as the accuracy of the response of al-Ghazālī to
the two statements and his confirmation thereof, as brought
forth by al-‘Aqabānī, may Allah have mercy on him. In this is
perspective and searching for those who ponder, for the words
here concern the permissible possibity. This possibility does
not necessitate the existence or non-existence of an
inconceivability. Such was the faith of Abū Jahl, at the same
time both possible and intellectually inconceivable. So ponder
this well.
347
APPENDIX VI
Racial Discrimination in the Spiritual
Path
y dear brother, may Allah have mercy on you:
know that Allah the Exalted said to the Prophet !
in a Sacred Tradition (╔adīth Qudsī), “If My servant
draws near to Me by a hand’s breadth, I draw nearer to him by
an arm’s length.” Allah did not limit this promise to the
ancients only, nor the contemporary folk; nor the red or the
black. Indeed, blackness of the skin does not prevent entry
among the rank of those drawn near (to their Lord). The
Prophet ! said of the Abyssinians (al-╔abasha), they being
black people (al-sūdān), “Even if the true faith had been in the
Pleiades (thurayya),1 they would have attained it!” He ! also
said, “Salmān2 is one of us, the people of the Prophet’s house

1. The Pleiades are a group of seven stars in the constellation Taurus.
2. Salman al-Farsi was a Persian companion of the Prophet Mu╕ammad,
who had been enslaved for many years before his emancipation at the hands
of the Prophet. Due to his high merit, the companions of the Prophet were
once arguing whether Salman as one of the Ansar (“helpers” from Medina)
or the Muhajirun (“emigrants” from Mecca). The matter was referred to the
M
348 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
(ahl al-bayt).” In connection with the saying of Allah, “And
others among them who have not yet joined them, and He is
the Omnipotent, the Wise” (Qur’ān, 62:3),3 it is reported in alJawāhir al-╔isān that Allah’s Messenger ! was asked, “Who are
the others?” So he took hold of Salmān’s hand and said, “Even
if the true faith had been in the Pleiades, men such as these
would have attained it!”4 This narration is found in the
collections of Muslim and Bukhārī.
Notice, may Allah have mercy on you, how the Prophet !
applied this distinction to Salmān’s people in particular, when
there was no other black person present at the gathering.5 So
you must realize that the black people may certainly have
goodness in them. May Allah furnish us with understanding
of the secrets of His speech and the speech of His Prophet, for
He is the Custodian thereof and the One who is Capable of it!
You should also study the twenty-ninth chapter of al-Futū╕āt
al-Makkiyya, by the Greatest Shaykh Ibn ‘Arabī al-╔ātimī,
concerning knowledge of the secret which linked Salmān to
the people of the Prophet’s family and the Saintly Poles (alAqtāb) whose secret knowledge he inherited. Here you will
discover the cure for burning thirst and sickness. This matter

Prophet, who solved the issue by saying, “Salman is one of us, the people of
the house.” See al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar.
3. Here are the relevant verses in full (Qur’ān, 62:2-3): “It is He who has sent
among the illiterate folk a Messenger from among themselves to rehearse to
them His Signs, to purify them, and to instruct them in Scripture and
wisdom – although they had previously been in clear error – as well as
others of them who have not yet joined them. And He is the Omnipotent, the
All-Wise.”
4. Reported by Imam Bukhārī in his ╖a╕ī╕, Imam Muslim in his ╖a╕ī╕, by
Imam al-Tirmidhī in his Sunan, and Imam A╕mad in his Musnad.
5. In explaining this section, Shaykh ╔asan Cisse (Medina Kaolack, 2000)
said that Salman, although not of African descent, was dark skinned.
Racial Discrimination in the Spiritual Path 349
is also mentioned in Rū╕ al-Bayān, in connection with the
Qur’ānic verse mentioned above.
Sahl b. Sa’d al-Sā’idī reported that the Prophet ! once said,
“In a dream, I saw myself watering black sheep, then white
sheep next in turn. What is your interpretation, O Abū Bakr?”
So Abū Bakr said, “O Prophet of Allah, as for the black sheep,
they represent the Arabs; and as for the white sheep, they
represent the non-Arabs who will follow you after the Arabs.”
The Prophet ! then told him, “That is just how the Angel
Gabriel explained it to me.”6
You should also study Chapter 366 of al-Futū╕āt alMakkiyya, where the author speaks about the Prophetic
inheritor (khalīfa) in the fourth generation (qarn) after three.7
He explains that his distinguished followers (rijāl) will follow
in the footsteps of the Prophet’s companions, may Allah be
well pleased with them. Ibn al-‘Arabī says:
Allah will appoint as his viziers a party whom Allah has
concealed in the secrecy of His unseen realm. Through unveiling
and spiritual witnessing, He has made them privy to the realities
and the command of Allah among His servants. Affairs will be
decided through their mutual consultation, for they are the
gnostics, aware of things as they are. As for the khalīfa, he bears a
sword of truth and civilized government. He has from Allah
what his rank and status require, for he is the khalīfa of
settlement (musaddad). He will understand the speech of the
animals. His justice flows among the human beings and the jinn,
by the secrets of his viziers’ knowledge appointed by Allah for
him. Allah said, “It is incumbent upon Us to assist the believers”
(Qur’ān 30:47). So they (the viziers) will follow in the footsteps of

6. Reported by Imam A╕mad in his Musnad.
7. The word qarn, here translated as “generation,” may also mean “summit”
or “mountain peak.”
350 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
the distinguished ones (rijāl) among the Prophet’s companions,
for “They are true to what they covenanted with Allah” (Qur’ān
33:23). And they will be from among the non-Arabs.
Concerning the verse, “Surely the noblest among you in
the sight of Allah is the one of you who is most righteous”
(Qur’ān 49:13), the author of Rū╕ al-Bayān said:
This Divine statement contains a reason for the prohibition of
racial prejudice, for it is said that the noblest in the sight of Allah
is the one who is most righteous (who has taqwa), even if he is a
black Abyssinian slave like Bilāl !. If you would compare
yourself to others, therefore, you must compete with them in
true devotion (taqwa); and in Allah’s gracious favor and mercy;
indeed, in Allah Himself. Consider the saying of the Prophet !,
“I am the master (sayyid) of the children of Adam, and I say this
without boasting.”8 In other words, “I do not take pride in the
mastery (siyāda) or in Messengership, but rather in worshipful
servitude, for this is the honor, and what an honor it is!”
Sufficient as a mark of honor is the precedence given to the
Servant over the Messenger in the tesimony, “I bear witness that
Mu╕ammad is His servant and His messenger.”
It has been related that Allah’s Messenger ! once passed
through the market of Medina, and he noticed that a young
black man was saying, “If someone buys me as a slave, he
must do so on the condition that he will not prevent me from
performing the five daily prayers behind Allah’s Messenger
!.” A man purchased him, and Allah’s Messenger ! used to
see the black man at every prayer. Then he noticed that he was
missing, so he asked his owner about him. The owner said,
“He has a fever.” So he ! paid him a visit, then asked about
him some days later. The owner told him, “His energy is spent

8. Reported by Imam Muslim in his ╖a╕ī╕ and by Imam al-Tirmidhi in his
Sunan.
Racial Discrimination in the Spiritual Path 351
and he is preparing for the death that is overtaking him.” He !
came and found him making his last movement and breathing
his last breath, so he took charge of his funeral washing and
burial. A matter of tremendous importance then came to the
attention of the Emigrants (Muhājirīn) and the Helpers (An╗ār),
through the revelation of the Qur’ānic verse (49:13), “Surely
Allah is All-Knowing,” meaning of all of you and your deeds,
and “All-Aware,” meaning of the secrets of your spiritual
states.
In his marginal notes, the Shaykh’s son said: “Lineage is
taken into account in customary usage and in Islamic Law, so
that a female descendant of the Prophet ! (sharīfa) may not
marry a Nabataean (Nabatī).” According to the dictionary (alQāmūs), the Nabataeans (al-anbāt) were a tribe with obscure
origins, inhabiting the regions between the Euphrates and the
Syria. But lineage ceases to be of any consequence in the face
of belief and true devotion (taqwa), which are greater and
dearer than lineage. Lineage in the face of taqwa is as the stars
which disappear when the sun rises. The disobedient sinner,
even if he belongs to the Prophet’s tribe of the Quraysh or is
wealthy like a king, has no worth compared to the righteous
believer, even if he is a black Abyssinian.
People pride themselves on many things in this world, but
genealogy is most insidious. Unlike money, offspring and
property, genealogy is unattainable by somebody who does
not already possess it. The poor man may become rich, to the
chagrin of the one who used to flaunt his wealth in front of
him. For this reason, Allah made a particular point to declare
genealogy insignificant in the face of true devotion (taqwa). As
genealogy is the greatest source of pride, the irrelevance of
other things may easily be deduced by the irrelevance of
352 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
genealogy in the face of taqwa. According to Prophetic
tradition, “Your Lord is One, and your father (Adam) is one.
The Arab has no superiority over the non-Arab, or the nonArab over the Arab; nor the red over the black, or the black
over the red, except by virtue of righteousness (taqwa).”9 On
this (nobility due to taqwa), the religious scholars are in
unanimous agreement, as has been attested to in Ba╕r al-
‘Ulūm.10
One of the distinguished scholars has said, “The rivalry
among creatures for precedence in the sight of Allah is due to
their lineage, not their point of origin. With respect to the
point of origin they are one, but where lineage is concerned
they are rivals. According to the Qur’ān, ‘Surely the noblest
among you in the sight of Allah is the one of you who is most
righteous’ (49:13). The contest for precedence is not resolved
by deeds, since he who follows may outstrip him who came
before. And if nobility belonged to things because of their
inherent prestige or their abodes, nobility would belong to the
Devil (Iblīs) over Adam !, which is why he said, ‘I am better
than him (Adam). You created me from fire, while You created
him from clay’ (Qur’ān, 7:12). But Iblīs was foolish in his
assertion, for nobility is a Divine prerogative, conferred only
by Allah the Exalted. So nobility truly belonged to Adam !.”
Jesus ! the son of Mary was asked, “Who is the noblest of
human beings?” He grasped two handfuls of dust, and he
asked, “Which of these two is the more noble?” Then he put
them together and threw them away. He said, “All human
beings come from dust, and the noblest of them in the sight of

9. Reported by Imam A╕mad in his Musnad and by Imam Abū Na’īm in
╔ilyat al-Awliyā’.
10. This could be the Kitab Bahr al-Ulum by Abū Layth al-Samarkandi, a
prominent work of Qur’ānic exegesis.
Racial Discrimination in the Spiritual Path 353
Allah is the one who is most righteous.” Salmān al-Fārsī !
said, “My father is Islam; I have no father apart from it, while
they boast of descent from Qays or Tamīm.” The Prophet !
said, “Allah does not take notice of your outer forms or your
possessions, but He does take notice of your hearts and your
intentions.”11 He is also recorded as having said, “O people,
humankind consists of only two types: a righteous believer,
noble in the sight of Allah, or a wretched corruptor, despised
by Allah.”12 According to a report from Ibn ‘Abbās !, the
Prophet ! said: “The nobility of this world is wealth, and the
nobility of the Hereafter is taqwa.” Another Hadith is related
from Abū Hurayrah !, as recorded in Kashf al-Asrār:13
The people will be assembled on the Day of Resurrection; then
they will be made to stand. Allah the Exalted will say to them,
“Often you used to speak while I was silent, but today you will
be silent and I will speak! I exalted My spiritual relationship, but
you acknowledged only your genealogies. I said: ‘Surely the
noblest among you in the sight of Allah is the one of you who is
most righteous.’ But you were scornful, and said, ‘No, the
noblest are so-and-so, the son of so-and-so, and so-and-so the
son of so-and-so.’ So you exalted your genealogies and
disparaged My spiritual relationship. But today I shall exalt My
spiritual relationship and disparage your geneaolgies. On this
day, the people assembled will surely come to know who are the
holders of nobility. So where are the righteous folk?”

11. Reported by Imam A╕mad in his Musnad, Imam Muslim in his ╖a╕ī╕, and
by Ibn Mājah in his Sunan.
12. Reported by Imam al-Tirmidhī in his Sunan.
13. The Kashf al-Asrār by Ruzbihan al-Baqli (d. 1209, Persia) describes the
author’s visionary experiences in the unseen world. It has been translated by
Carl Ernst as The Unveiling of Secrets: Diary of a Sufi Master (Parvardigar
Press, 1997).
354 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Imam al-Shāfi’ī said, “Allah will pay no attention to four
things on the Day of Resurrection: the abstinence of the
eunuch, the righteousness of a soldier, the fidelity of a woman,
and the worship of a young boy.” And this is explained as
referring to the majority (within each group), as has been
mentioned in Maqā╗id al-╔asana.14
In al-Ta’wīlāt al-Najmiyya,15 the saying of Allah the Exalted,
“O humankind, We created you from a male and a female”
(Qur’ān, 49:13), is said to refer to the creation of the hearts.
This is meant to indicate that every human has been created
from a male, meaning the spirit (rū╕), and a female, meaning
the soul (nafs). The verse continues: “And We have made you
races and tribes.” In other words, “We have made you into
two types, those of races (shu’ūb), inclined toward their
mother, she being the soul (nafs); and those of tribes (qabā’il),
inclined towards their father, he being characterized by the
attributes of the spirit (rū╕). The Qur’ānic verse concludes: “So
that you may become mutually acquainted.” That is to say:
“So that you may become acquainted with one another as
masters of the hearts and lords of the souls.” It is not meant to
imply “that you may compete for numerological superiority,
put each other down or rival one another in boastfulness,
taking pride in mental faculties and natural psychological
characteristics.” Such an interpretation (of the verse) lends
itself to obscurity and murky darkness, from which no benefit

14. Al-Maqā╗id al-╔asana is a work on ╔adīth by Mu╕ammad al-Sakhāwī (d.
1497), an Egyptian scholar of Shāfi’ī jurisprudence and Prophetic traditions.
15. Al-Ta’wīlāt al-Najmiyya is the comprehensive work of Qur’ānic exegesis
written by the Persian Sufi ‘Alā’ al-Dawla al-Simnānī at the end of the 13th
Century. Al-Simnānī was a disciple of the Najm al-Din al-Kubra (of the
Kubrawiyya Sufi order), and claims his own text records the beginning of
his Shaykh’s own exegesis. See Jamal Elias, The Throne Carrier of God: The Life
and Thought of ‘Ala ad-Dawla As-Simnani (SUNY Press, 1995), p. 203-204.
Racial Discrimination in the Spiritual Path 355
can be derived. The only solution is to join (the verse) to faith
and righteousness. Actions thereby remain untainted by
hypocritical ostentation. Moral virtues remain free from
passionate desires. Permitted desires are not related to selfconceit. Only in this case can benefit be derived from
competition and rivalry.
Allah the Exalted said, “Surely the noblest among you in
the sight of Allah is the most righteous.” The Prophet !
added, “Nobility is righteousness (taqwa).”16 The righteous one
is he who is furthest from human characteristics and closest to
Divine characteristics. Taqwa means being cautiously on
guard, and the one with taqwa is he who guards against his
ego-self (nafs) by taking refuge in his Lord. Such a person is
nobler in the sight of Allah than anyone else.

16. Cited in the I╕yā’ ‘Ulūm al-Dīn of Imam al-Ghazālī.
356
APPENDIX VII
Femininity and Sainthood
now that femininity does not prevent inclusion
among the best of Allah’s chosen servants. Allah did
not mention men’s achievement of spiritual stations
without also mentioning women’s achievement. The Most
High said:
Muslim men and Muslim women
Men who believe and women who believe
Men who speak the truth and women who speak the truth
Patient men and patient women
Humble men and humble women
Men who give in charity and women who give in charity
Men who keep the fast and women who keep the fast
Chaste men and chaste women
And men who remember Allah frequently and women who
remember –
Allah has prepared for them for them forgiveness and a vast
reward (Qur’ān, 33:35).
Of all the spiritual stations attained by men – other than
bearing revelation (risāla), prophecy (nubuwwa) or the axis of
K
Femininity and Sainthood 357
sainthood (qu╙bāniyya) – there is not one which is not teeming
with women who are true believers, devoutly pious, pure,
righteous, humble and filled with good. Consider what has
come in the Qur’ān concerning Mary in praise of her condition
(amr): “Falsehood cannot approach it from in front or behind”
(41:42). Allah’s praise of Mary reached the extent of His
mentioning her thirty times in the Qur’ān, resulting in
scholarly disagreement as to whether or not she was actually a
Prophet. The truth of the matter was that she was one of
Truth’s champions (╗iddīqa), for prophecy only comes through
men. The proof is Allah’s statement, “The Messiah, son of
Mary, was only a Messenger … and his mother was a
champion of the Truth (╗iddīqa)” (5:75).
So it has been made known that women are not denied
access to the station of Truth’s champions, nor to any of the
other spiritual stations. There have been women who attained
to spiritual stations attained only by very few men. Examples
include Rābi’a al-‘Adawiyya1 and those who have followed in
her footsteps to the present day, like Lālla Manāna2 in the time

1. Rabi’a al-‘Adawiyya al-Qaysiyya (717-801), of Basra (Iraq), was a famous
ascetic and disciple of ╔asan al-Ba╗rī. Many of her statements have passed
into the canon of Sufi aphorisms, such as, “O Allah! If I worship You out of
fear for the Hellfire, throw me in it. If I worship You out of desire for
Paradise, prevent me from it. But if I worship You for Your own sake, do not
deny me Your everlasting Beauty.” She died in Jerusalem. For more, see
Farid al-Din Attar, “Rabe’a al-Adawiya,” in Arberry (trans.), Muslim Saints
and Mystics (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1983); and Margaret Smith,
Rābi’a the Mystic & Her Fellow-saints in Islām: Being the Life and Teachings of
Rābi’a Al-‘Adawiyya al-Qaysiyya of Basra, Together with Some Account of the
Place of the Women Saints in Islām (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1984).
2. Lalla Manana was a companion of Shaykh A╕mad Tijānī known for her
spiritual unveilings. She was on good terms with the Moroccan Sultan,
Mawlay Sulayman, and was influential in directing others to take the Tijānī
Path, such as A╕mad al-Banani. She used to refer to Shaykh Tijānī as “the
358 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
of our Shaykh (Tijānī), and others such as Amina bint al-Khāl.
There is no end to the mention of such women. A poet has
said:
If women were as we have mentioned
Women must surely be superior to men
For femininity is no disgrace for the noun, “sun” (shams)
And masculinity is no pride for the “crescent moon” (hilāl).3
It is related in the Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī4 that ‘Alī Harazim once
asked Shaykh Tijānī ! the meaning of Allah’s saying, “And
when the angels said, “O Mary, Allah has chosen you and
made you pure, and has preferred you above the women of all
the worlds” (Qur’ān, 3:42); and His saying, “And We inspired
the mother of Moses, saying: ‘Suckle him, and when you fear
for him, cast him into the river and do not be afraid, and do
not grieve, for We shall bring him back to you, and We shall
make him one of the Messengers” (28:7). He asked him, “Does
the speech of the Angels to Mary mean that she was a
Prophet? And does the inspiration (wa╕y) to the mother of
Moses likewise mean she was a Prophet? And concerning the
matron (sayyida) Mary and our matron Fā╙ima (daughter of
Mu╕ammad), which of them is superior? What about the

Sultan.” On her first meeting with him, he informed her of an impending
plague descending on Fes and asked her to pray for Allah to lift the calamity
from the Muslims. This she did, and the plague was averted. See A╕mad
Sukayrij, Kashf al-Hijāb. Sukayrij also mentions another prominent female
enraptured mystic (majdhūba) of Fes who was Shaykh Tijānī’s follower,
Safiya Labbada, also famous for her spiritual unveilings.
3. Arabic nouns are endowed with either masculine or feminine genders
which determine verbs and adjectives relating to them. Unlike many
European languages, the Arabic word for sun is feminine while the word for
moon is masculine.
4. The lengthy citation which follows is excerpted from the last chapter of
the first volume of Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī, concerning Shaykh Tijānī’s explanation
of various verses of the Qur’ān put to him by his disciples.
Femininity and Sainthood 359
(other) women of the worlds? What about (the merit of) Asiya
bint Muzāhim, or Khadīja, or ‘Ā’isha, or Fā╙ima, may Allah be
pleased with them all?” The Shaykh replied:
Here is the answer to your question, and with Allah is the
success by His blessing and generosity:
Know that the prophecy attributed to the matron Mary, and
the argument of those who maintain it, is indeed based on
Allah’s saying, ‘And when the Angels said, O Mary, Allah has
chosen you and made you pure, and has preferred you above
the women of all the worlds.’ And the attribution of prophecy to
the mother of Moses is likewise related to His saying, ‘And We
inspired the mother of Moses.’ These assertions are unreliable,
however. The definitive opinion on the subject is that prophecy
is not possible for women.
As for Mary and Asiya, the Prophet ! said about them:
“Among men are many who have been perfected. But no women
have achieved perfection except Asiya, the daughter of
Muzāhim, and Mary, the daughter of ‘Imrān.”5 The meaning
here is that Asiya and Mary attained the rank of sincere
truthfulness (╗iddīqiyya), which is the highest degree in
knowledge and gnosis of Allah – a knowledge permeating the
whole being. There is nothing beyond this rank except that of
that of the saintly poles (qu╙baniyya) and prophets (nubuwwa). So
this is the height to which these women attained.
As for Khadīja, the Prophet ! spoke openly of her superior
merit. This caused ‘Ā’isha to say, “I was never jealous of any
woman among his wives with the exception of Khadīja, for he so
often mentioned and venerated her.”6 Ibn Sab’7 reported in his

5. ╔adīth reported in Imam Bukhārī, Imam Muslim, Tirmidhī and Ibn
Mājah.
6. Narration found in Bukhārī, Muslim, Tirmidhī, Ibn Mājah and A╕mad b.
Hanbal.
7. Ibn Sab’ was a scholar of prophetic traditions who was cited by Jalāl alDīn al-Suyū╙ī in support of the idea that the Prophet Mu╕ammad’s being
was light, so that he did not caste a shadow.
360 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Shifā’ that the Prophet one day told the people, “My favorite
among my women would surely be ‘Ā’isha the daughter of (Abū
Bakr) al-╖iddīq, were it not for the superior merit Allah
bestowed on Khadīja, the daughter of Khuwaylid.” Thus the
Prophet proclaimed the superiority of Khadīja over ‘Ā’isha.
(As for the superiority of Fā╙ima) It has also been reported in
the Shifā’ of Ibn Sab’ that the Prophet once said to Fā╙ima, “You
are the matron (sayyida) of the women of all the worlds.” She put
her hand on her head in modesty and asked, “But what of Asiya
the daughter of Muzāhim, Mary the daughter of Imrān, and
Khadīja the daughter of Khuwaylid?” He told her, “Asiya bint
Muzāhim is the matron of the women of her world, Mary bint
Imrān is the matron of the women of her world, Khadīja bint
Khuwaylid is the matron of the women of her world, and you
are the matron of the women of your world.”8 And he told ‘Alī
on the day of his marriage to Fā╙ima, “I have given the matron of
the women of all the worlds to you in marriage.”
As for ‘Ā’isha, the Prophet once said, “The superiority of
‘Ā’isha over all other women is like the superiority of meat and
broth over all other food.”9
The scholars have differed in regard to relative superiority of
Fā╙ima and ‘Ā’isha. Each side favoring one or the other has
based its argument on the relevant Prophetic tradition cited
above. Mālik said, “As for myself, I do not consider anyone
superior to her whom he described as a part of him !.”10
The gnostic sages have arrived at a similar conclusion, but
by way of spiritual unveiling, not by listening to reports. They
have generally concluded that after the death of her father !,

8. ╔adīth cited by al-Zabīdī in Itti╕āf al-Sādat al-Muttaqīn fi sharħ ‘Ulūm al-Dīn
and by al-Haythami in Majma’ al-Zawā’id.
9. ╔adīth on the authority of Abū Musa al-Ash’ari found in the Sunan of Ibn
Mājah.
10. The Prophet once said, “Fā╙ima is a part of me. Whatever upsets her
upsets me. Whatever harms her harms me” (╔adīth in Imam Muslim, with
similar wording in Imam Tirmidhī).
Femininity and Sainthood 361
Fā╙ima attained the exalted station of the saintly poles
(qu╙baniyya). This being the case, there is no comparison between
Fā╙ima and ‘Ā’isha. Allah says, “Surely the noblest among you
in the sight of Allah is the one of you who is most truly devout”
(Qur’ān, 49:13). And after the Prophets, none of Allah’s creation,
whether among humans or Angels, despite whatever they may
achieve, can realize one tenth of one percent of the true devotion
(taqwa) realized by the pole of the saintly poles (qu╙b al-aq╙āb).
This saintly pole is the most excellent Muslim in each age, apart
from the “keys of the treasures” (mafātī╕ al-kunūz) that may exist.
The qu╙b is superior to them in some respects, and they are
superior to him in some respects.
If you have understood this, you will know that Fā╙ima’s
excellence surpasses that of ‘Ā’isha, Mary and Asiya. Her
attainment to the station of the Saintly Pole, from which other
women are excluded, was due to the fact she did not menstruate.
Also, she received from her father a degree of perfection to
which other women could not aspire. So this explains (in part)
how she became the Saintly Pole, and the Saintly Pole (qu╙b) is
the master of existence (sayyid al-wujūd) in every time, apart from
the Keys of the Treasuries (mafātīh kunūz) that may exist. The
lack of her menstruation was due to her formation (in the womb
of Khadīja) from the Prophet’s seed after he had eaten one of the
apples from the Garden of Paradise. For this reason, the Prophet
! said of her, “She is a human houri.” Her being a houri was due
to the fact that she was not created from the specks of dust
transmitted from the body of Adam, peace be upon him, to the
rest of his offspring. The seed that created her was formed from
the mysteries and secrets of the Garden, from which Allah
created the houris. This resulted in the perfection of her purity,
for she was untouched by (some of) the conditions of human
nature that other women experience. So she became a human
houri, and she attained to the highest degree in the presence of
the Real, above which there is no degree except Prophethood.
362 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
‘Ā’isha and the others could never aspire to this, so it must be
clear to you that Fā╙ima is more excellent than all excellent
women.
We said that the attribution to Prophecy to Mary is an
invalid hypothesis, and this is based on (her inability to attain)
the degree of the Saintly Pole (implicit in prophethood). In every
time, the Saintly Pole has a mandate (wijha) for every atom
among the existing entities, thus assisting and improving
everything in existence, atom by atom. Whenever a worshipper
prostrates himself for the sake of Allah, or bows for Him, or
stands erect for Him, or remembers Allah, the Saintly Pole is the
one who makes this possible for him (muqīm lahu). It is through
the Saintly Pole that the spiritual master (shaykh) performs his
glorification, and it is through him that the worshipper performs
his worship, through him that one who prostrates before Allah
prostrates. And it is through him that the other design (wijha),
which cannot be described, is realized.
The essence of the matter is that the Saintly Pole is to the
whole of existence as the spirit (rū╕) is to the body. The body has
no vitality, no sense and no movement without the spirit. All
faculties of the physical body, external and internal, are made
possible by the living spirit linked to the body. If the spirit
departs from the physical body, all of its faculties cease to
function, and it becomes a corpse.
The same applies to all the elements in existence, with
regard to their relationship to the Saintly Pole. He is for them
like the spirit for the physical body. If his spirituality (rū╕āniyya)
departed from them, the whole of existence would pass into
extinction. He is the spirit of existence, and the entirety of its
properties. He is responsible for their grouping and their
separation, their commonality and their particularity, their
liberation and their confinement. None of the elements of
existence can survive unless the spirituality of the Saintly Pole
exists within them. If the Saintly Pole’s spirituality was removed
Femininity and Sainthood 363
from them, the whole of existence would cease, becoming a
featureless corpse.
This power of his comes from his bearing the burden of the
supreme secret, and his traveling in the entirety of its domains.
By means of the secret of the Greatest Name, he has come to be
steadfast in the presence of Allah, perfectly observing the modes
of conduct prescribed by the Divine Presence. He perfectly
fulfills Allah’s rightful dues, whether pertaining to the
manifestation of His Names, His Attributes, or His Essence; and
this at all times and in every instant measured by the blink of an
eye.
There is no limit to the ways in which our Lord is constantly
manifesting Himself in every instant measured by the blink of an
eye, through His Names, His Attributes, His Essence, and the
revolving of His affairs. Throughout all of this, the Saintly Pole
remains steadfast in the presence of Allah, according each
manifestation what it rightfully deserves in terms of proper
conduct, duties, and service; in every instant measured by the
blink of an eye. Even while Allah’s manifestations keep
multiplying endlessly, he fulfills all their rightful dues and treats
them each with proper conduct.
There is no one in existence apart from the Saintly Pole who
can bear the burden of all of these manifestations of the Real.
And he is engaged in this throughout his life, in every instant
measured by the blink of an eye. If all the sincerely truthful
(╗iddīqīn) stood together in Allah's presence to fulfill these terms,
they would become extinct in less than the blink of an eye. But
this is the Saintly Pole’s regular habit.
If you have understood this well, you will realize that
women do not have the strength to bear this burden, because
menstruation precludes them from the performance of
devotions. If a woman assumed the station of saintly polehood
(qu╙baniyya), surely she would neglect some of the rights due to
Allah on certain days of her life, namely the days of her
364 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
menstruation. And if she did neglect the obligations due to
Allah, the office of saintly polehood would be annihilated, and
this would result in the extinction of the whole of existence.
So you have understood why women cannot assume the
office of saintly polehood. And since this is true of the saintly
polehood, it is even more logical in regards to the office of
Prophethood. Indeed, Prophethood is a weightier task than
saintly polehood. As for Fā╙ima, may Allah be pleased with her,
she attained to the rank of the Saintly Pole because she acquired
certain Divine perfections, so she could bear the burden of the
secret of the Greatest Name.
365
APPENDIX VIII
Ecstasy and the Spiritual Concert
s for the ecstasies of the enraptured ones and the
lovers, and their infatuation with the remembrance of
Allah, or the recitation of the poems of the lovers,
they have a firm basis and a strong support. The Prophet !
was once passionately affected, so that his cloak fell off. He
then presented it to those who remembered the Beloved, and
he said something that was interpreted as, “If someone is not
moved by the rememberance of the Beloved, he is not one of
the noble-hearted.”
In al-Futū╕āt al-Makkiyya, at the end of one of his wise
counsels, the author (Ibn al-‘Arabī) relates:
We were informed, in the city of Mosul in the year 601 A.H.
(1204 C.E.), by A╕mad b. Mas’ūd b. Shaddād al-Muqri’ alMaw╗ilī, he being a reliable source; that he was informed by Abū
Ja’far ibn al-Qā╓ī ; on the authority of Yūsuf b. al-Qāsim alDiyābakrī; on the authority of Jamāl al-Islām Abū al-╔asan ‘Alī
b. A╕mad al-Qurayshi al-Hakkārī; on the authority of Abū al-
╔asan al-Karkhī; that Abū al-‘Abbās A╕mad b. Mu╕ammad b.
al-Fa╓l al-Nihāwandī said that his Shaykh, Ja’far b. Mu╕ammad
al-Khuldī, said:
A
366 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
“I traveled with al-Junayd, may Allah bestow His mercy
upon him, on the road to the ╔ijāz, until we reached Mount
Sinai. Al-Junayd climbed the mountain, and we along with him.
When we stood upon the spot upon which Moses ! had once
stood, we were overcome by the awesome dignity of the place.
We were accompanied by an eloquent speaker; so al-Junayd
urged him to say something. He said:
There appeared to him, after the passion had subsided,
A lightning flash that shimmered, with a scintillating glow
It appeared like the hem of a cloak, and beneath it
Shelter was hard to find, its columns unapproachable.
So he tried to see how it shined, but he could not look at it
And He, the Exalted, turned him away,
For its scimitars consisted of fire
And its scabbards were streaming with rain.
“Al-Junayd then fell into ecstasy, and we along with him.
None of us knew whether we were in heaven or on earth.
“There was a monastery in our vicinity, and in it was a
monk. The monk cried, ‘O community of Mu╕ammad! For the
sake of Allah, respond to me!’ However no one paid him any
attention because of the pleasure of the moment. The monk cried
out a second time, ‘For the sake of the true religion, you must
respond to me!’ But still no one answered him, so he appealed a
third time, ‘For the sake of the One whom you worship…’ and
yet still no one gave him a response. Then when we retired from
the spiritual concert (samā’), and al-Junayd was about to descend
from the mountain, we said, ‘This monk appealed to us and
entreated us, but we paid him no heed.’ Al-Junayd then said,
‘Let us return to him, for perhaps Allah will guide him to Islam.’
“So we called out to him and he came to join us. He saluted
us with the greeting of peace (salām), and he asked, ‘Which of
you is the teacher?’ Al-Junayd replied, ‘All of them are masters
Ecstasy and the Spiritual Concert 367
and teachers.’ He said, ‘Surely, one of them must be the most
distinguished,’ and we all pointed to Al-Junayd. The monk said,
‘Tell me about this knowledge which you have acquired. Is it
particular to your religion or is it universal?’ Al-Junayd replied,
‘It is surely particular.’ The monk then proceeded to ask, ‘Is it for
special groups of people, or for people in general?’ Al-Junaid
said, ‘It is surely for special groups of people.’ The monk
inquired, ‘With what intention do they stand up (in the spiritual
concert)?’ Al-Junayd said, ‘With the intention of hope and
delight in Allah the Exalted.’ He asked, ‘With what intention do
you listen?’ Al-Junayd replied, ‘With the intention of hearing
from Allah the Exalted.’ The monk then asked, ‘With what
intention do you cry aloud?’ Al-Junayd responded, ‘With the
intention of compliance with Lordly service, as when Allah the
Exalted said to the spirits: “Am I not your Lord?” They said,
“Yes indeed, we testify” (Qur’ān 7:172). The monk then asked,
‘What is this voice?’ Al-Junayd said, ‘A pre-eternal call.’ The
monk asked, ‘With what intention do you sit down?’ Al-Junayd
said, ‘Out of fear of offending Allah the Exalted.’ The monk
exclaimed, ‘You have spoken the truth!’
“He then said, ‘Stretch out your hand! I bear witness that
there is not god but Allah, One without partners, and that
Mu╕ammad ! is Allah’s servant and messenger.’ The monk
embraced Islam and maintained its excellence. Al-Junayd asked
him, ‘How did you know I was telling the truth?’ He replied,
‘Because I read in the Gospel (Injīl), which had been revealed to
the Messiah, son of Mary:
The elite members of the community of Mu╕ammad will
wear a tattered gown (khirqa). They will eat a piece of bread,
and they will be satisfied with a mouthful. In Allah they will
rejoice, for Him they will yearn with ardent longing, and in
Him they will become passionately affected. They will both
love and fear Him.
368 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
“The monk stayed with us for three days and then died, may
Allah bestow His mercy upon him.”
For more on the subject of the spiritual concert (samā’), the
reader should refer to the section pertaining to congregational
remembrance (Section I, Chapter 3).
369
APPENDIX IX
Concerning Spiritual Retreat, the
Qur’ān and the Spiritual Path
haykh Sīdī Mukhtār al-Kuntī was once asked, “What is
the reason for prohibiting the recitation of the Qur’ān in
the spiritual retreat (khalwa)?” To this, he replied:
The recitation of the Qur’ān is not forbidden under any
circumstances, except in cases of a legal prohibition. The
spiritual retreat is a special case, for the simple reason that its
purpose is confined to the concentration on the Name. In this
way, the divine manifestation may be singular, and this singular
manifestation is imprinted on the mirror of the seeker’s
insightful perception. For when one illumination (fat╕) is
opened, it becomes a doorway to all illuminations.
The manifestations of the Qur’ān are manifold, and when
they are numerous, the seeker’s aspiration (himma) is
correspondingly fragmented and the journey becomes
protracted for the seeker. His aim is the shortening of the
journey, for he is intent on spiritual elevation (tarqiya) and not
engaged in the quest for rewards. Otherwise, those who draw
near to their Lord will not draw near in the manner described (in
S
370 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
╔adīth Qudsi) where Allah the Exalted says, “If My servant
draws nearer to Me by a hand’s breadth, I draw near to him by
an arm’s length.”
Shaykh al-Kuntī was also asked, “Is it permissible for
someone to enter the Spiritual Path (╙arīqa) before he has
finished acquiring all the knowledge he may need, or is it
not?” The Shaykh replied:
It is permissible, and it is not farfetched if we maintain its
necessity. Entry into the Spiritual Path will only increase him in
knowledge by virtue of his affiliation with the chain (silsila) of
the spiritual masters (shuyūkh). However, it is not appropriate to
enter isolation or pious seclusion before he has acquired the
knowledge he needs, for these practices are not accompanied by
learning and teaching.”
371
Conclusion of the Appendix
t has occurred to me that I ought to refrain from including
too much in this Appendix, for fear of becoming tediously
long-winded.
I ask Allah to provide us with the perfection of approval
and acceptance, just as I beg Him for pardon, well-being, and
everlasting dispensation in the religion, in this world and in
the Hereafter. I ask Him to resurrect us in the company of
Shaykh al-Tijānī, the Seal of the Saints. Allah is the Custodian
of my supplication and the One who is Capable of it. I ask
Him to grant us enough of what concerns us and what does
not concern us in the business of this world and the Hereafter.
I ask Him to benefit us, and to make us a source of benefit
to all of His servants, the believing men and the believing
women, the Muslim men and the Muslim women, those of
them who are still alive and those who have died. Amen, O
Lord of all the worlds!
This work was concluded on the eighth day of Mu╕arram,
in the year 1351 A.H. (1932 C.E.) in the village of Kossi.
Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of Majesty,
Far from what they attribute!
And peace be upon those sent as Messengers,
And praise be to Allah, Lord of all the worlds!
(Qur’ān, 37:180-182)
I
373
Glossary of Arabic Terms
‘Adnān Adnān was a descendent of Prophet Isma’il
through his son Kedar. The Banū, or tribe or
people, of ‘Adnān are the ‘Adnāni Arabs tracing
descent through Prophet Ibrāhīm. The “best of the
Banū ‘Adnān” refers to the Prophet Mu╕ammad.
‘Ālim/‘Ulamā’ Scholar of the classical Islamic sciences.
‘Ārif Knowledgeable person of God, one who has
attained ma’rifa, gnostic.
‘Asharites The school of Islamic theology that emerged in
opposition to the Mu’tazilites, thus holding to the
primacy of revelation over reason. It became the
dominant school of theology after the ninth
century of the common era.
Banu Madar The Banū Mu╓ar, one of two branches of the
Adanite tribe of Northern Arabia, trace descent from
Mudar, who descended from Ni╛ār, a son of ‘Adnān.
Basmala The name for the phrase, “In the Name of Allah
the Compassionate the Merciful.”
Dhāt The essence or essential being (of Allah).
Dhawq Literally “taste,” in the context of Sufism meaning
tasting or experience of Divine realities and
spiritual states.
374 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Dhikr/Adhkār The remembrance or recollection of God.
Fat╕ Literally “opening” or “victory;” in Sufism
meaning spiritual illumination.
Fay╓a Flood, overflowing grace or bounty.
Fiqh Literally “understanding,” has come to mean the
understanding of the Sacred Law by Muslim
jurists, thus jurisprudence.
Ghawth Savior or succor. In Sufism the word is often used
interchangeably with Qu╙b.
╔adīth Traditions or sayings reported from the Prophet
Muhammad.
╔a╓ra Spiritual presence; similar to a Divine reality
(╕aqīqa). Thus al-╔a╓rat al-Mu╕ammadiyya, the
spiritual presence of Mu╕ammad, is similar in
meaning to the Mu╕ammadan spiritual reality (al-
╔aqīqa al-Mu╕ammadiyya).
╔ājj The pilgrimage to Mecca compulsory on all
Muslims with means.
╔āl Spiritual state, considered a gift bestowed by God;
usually an ephemeral experience, as opposed to
the spiritual station (maqām).
╔aqīqa Reality, in the context of Sufism, the Reality of
Divine Being.
Haylala The congregational remembrance of La ilaha illAllah
Himma Spiritual or devotional zeal, aspiration. An
individual’s himma is not always limited to
himself; the himma of the spiritual guide is
considered an important inspiration for the
disciple, sometimes likened to a magnetic force or
rope pulling the disciple into the Divine Presence.
Glossary of Arabic Terms 375
‘Ilm/‘Ulūm Knowledge, science, religious learning; sometimes
connoting knowledge gained by exercise of the
mind, rather than gnosis (ma’rifa) obtained directly
from God.
Imām Technically the leader of the prayer in the mosque,
but more generally the head or leader of a
community.
Ism/Asmā’ One of the ninety-nine Names of God.
Jadhb The attraction or rapture the Sufi aspirant feels for
God
Jinn Beings or “spirits” of free-will created from fire
and thus unseen by most humans.
Kharijites The Kharijites, or khawārij, get their name from
“going out” of the community by rejecting the
authority of ‘Alī b. Abi Talib, and any later Imam
who they believed went against the
commandment of Allah. They were responsible
for the assassination of ‘Alī.
Ma’rifa The experiential knowledge of God, gnosis; as
opposed to rational speculation.
Madhhab School of Islamic jurisprudence, usually referring
to one of four: the ╔anafī, Mālikī, Shāfi’ī, or
╔anbalī schools.
Mahdi The “rightly guided one;” in Islamic eschatology,
the expected savior who will usher in a period of
peace prior to the coming of the Antichrist and the
subsequent return of Jesus.
Majdhūb One who has been attracted or enraptured by the
Divine.
Malāmatiyya The Malamatiyya were Sufis that invited public
reproach by pretending to be engaged in
reprehensible behavior. This was a means of
376 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
hiding their real spiritual position and purifying
their ego-selves. Later Sufis justified the
appellation “Malāmatī” for a person of high
spiritual state who blended with the ordinary
Muslims, not distinguishing himself by public
displays of piety beyond that normally practiced
by the Muslim community.
Maqām Spiritual station, an enduring state of spiritual
elevation which the aspirant acquires in his
progress towards God; as opposed to ╕āl, the
temporary spiritual state.
Mu’tazila The Mu’tazilites originated in eighth century and
strove to reconcile Islamic doctrines with the
Hellenistic framework of reason.
Mujaddid “Renewer”; according to ╔adīth, one will come
every hundred years to renew the faith of Islam.
Mujtahid Scholar of independent legal reasoning, not bound
by a particular school of jurisprudence (madhhab).
Murīd Literally “one who desires”; thus an aspirant or
Sufi disciple.
Nafs The self, soul or ego of the human being.
Qu╙b/Aq╙āb According to Sufis, the saintly “pole” through
whom Allah maintains the universe through his
exemplary consciousness of God.
Rū╕ The spirit or “eternal soul” of the human being.
Sharī’a The Islamic Sacred Law based on the texts of the
Qur’ān and the Sunnah.
Shaykh General term for an Islamic scholar, but in Sufism
the word also carries the meaning of a spiritual
master or guide capable of training aspirants.
╖ifāt The attributes or descriptions (of Allah).
Glossary of Arabic Terms 377
Sulūk The act of traveling the path to God
Sunnah The model of sayings and actions left by the
Prophet Muhammad and his companions.
Tahlīl The act of declaring God’s Oneness, saying La ilaha
ill-Allah.
Ta╕mīd The act of praising or thanking God, saying
Al╕amdu-li-Llah.
Takbīr The act of magnifying God, saying Allahu-Akbar.
Tarbiya In the context of Sufism, the spiritual training or
education leading to gnosis.
╘arīqa/╘uruq Spiritual path, way or Sufi order.
Ta╗awwuf The science of the soul’s purification, thus Sufism.
Tasbī╕ The act of glorifying God, saying Sub╕ān-Allah.
Walī/Awliyā’ Friend of God; thus saint.
Wa╛īfa Literally an “office” or “duty”; in the context of
Sufism a daily practice of remembrance similar to
the wird. Within the Tijaniyya, the wa╛īfa is recited
out-loud and in congregation, as opposed to the
wird, which is recited silently and individually.
Wird/Awrād The liturgical arrangement of remembrance
practiced by a particular Sufi order.
Zakāt Official alms-tax calculated at 2.5% of a Muslim’s
wealth.
379
Sources for the Kāshif
he following sources are cited most frequently by
Shaykh Ibrāhīm. They do not include ╔adīth
collections such as ╖a╕ī╕ Bukhārī or the Muwa╙╙a of
Imam Mālik. Works which are only cited once or twice are not
included here.
Baqlī, Ruzbihan al-, Arā’is al-Bayān.
Al-Baqlī (d. 1209) was a famous Sufi of Shiraz, Persia. The Arā’is
is a Sufi commentary on the Qur’ān. He is also the author of
Kashf al-Asrār, which has been translated by Carl Ernst as The
Unveiling of Secrets: Diary of a Sufi Master (Parvardigar Press,
1997).
Barūsī, Isma’īl al-Haqqī, Rū╕ al-Bayān.
The ten-volume Qur’ānic exegesis of Isma’īl al-Haqqī Barusi (or
Burusawi or Bursawi, d. 1724, Anatolia), Rū╕ al-Bayān, is one of
the most comprehensive Sufi exegeses of the Qur’ān.
Ghazālī, Abū ╔amīd al-, I╕yā’ ‘Ulūm al-Dīn.
Al-Ghazālī (d. 1111, Baghdad), was known the “Proof (hujja) of
Islam,” and is credited with the most comprehensive
reconciliation of Sufism with the Islamic legal tradition. His
primary work is the I╕yā’ ‘Ulūm al-Dīn, “The Revival of the
Religious Sciences,” comprising four volumes of ten chapters (or
books) each. The most reliable translations are the “Ghazali
T
380 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
series” published by Islamic Texts Society, which has completed
books 9, 11-13, 15, 32, 34 and 37. The site www.ghazali.org has
collected translations of most of the I╕yā’s forty chapters from
various sources and has made them available online.
Harāzim al-Barāda, ‘Alī, Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī wa bulūgh al-amānī fī fay╓
Sīdī Abī al-‘Abbās al-Tijānī.
The Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī, written in 1799 by Shaykh A╕mad alTijānī’s closest disciple, is considered the most important
primary source for the Tijāniyya.
Ibn ‘Abbād al-Rundī, Abū ‘Abd-Allah, Ghayth al-Mawāhib al-’Alīyya
(known as al-Tanbīh)
Ibn ‘Abbād (d. 1390) was born in Ronda, Andalusia, and later
settled in Fes, Morocco; where he led the Friday prayer in the
Qarawiyyin mosque. He was a renowned shaykh of the
Shādhiliyya order, and his al-Tanbīh is the first commentary on
the ╔ikam of Ibn ‘A╙ā Allah. He also authored two collections of
letters. For more on his life and works, see John Renard
(translated), Ibn ‘Abbad of Ronda: Letters on the Sufi Path (Paulist
Press, 1986).
Ibn ‘Ajība, A╕mad, Īqā╛ al-Himam fī Shar╕ Kitāb al-╔ikam.
Ibn ‘Ajība (d. 1809) was a prominent scholar of the Shadhiliyya
Sufi order in Morocco. His commentary on the Kitāb al-╔ikam by
Ibn ‘A╙ā-Allah (d. 1309, Alexandria) is considered one of the best
of many such commentaries, and it is widely known in West
Africa. His autobiography has been translated: The Autobiography
(Fahrasa) of a Moroccan Sufi: A╕mad ibn ‘Ajiba, by Jean-Louis
Michon and David Streight (Fons Vitae, 1999).
Ibn al-‘Arabī al-╔ātimī, Mu╕yī al-Dīn, Futū╕āt al-Makkiyya
Ibn al-‘Arabī (d. 1240) was born in Andalusia and later settled in
Syria. He was known as “the Greatest Shaykh,” and his writings
have influenced later Sufi scholars, including those of the
Tijāniyya. His most comprehensive work is the multi-volume
Futū╕āt al-Makkiyya (“Meccan Illuminations”). This latter work
Sources for the Kāshif 381
speaks about the Seal of the Saints that will be found in Fes,
Morocco. Numerous studies have appeared on the Shaykh and
his writings. Noteworthy among these are the works of Henry
Corbin, Michel Chodkiewicz, William Chittick, Titus Burckhardt,
Claude Addas, Michael Sells and Alexander Knysh.
Ibn al-‘Arabī al-╔ātimī, Mu╕yī al-Dīn, ‘Anqā’ Mughrib fī ma’rifat
khatm al-awliyā’ wa shams al-maghrib.
This work concerns the saintly hierarchy and the concept of the
Seal of the Saints. It has been translated by Gerald Elmore,
Islamic Sainthood in the Fullness of Time: Ibn ‘Arabi’s book ‘The
Fabulous Gryphon’ (Brill, 1999).
Ibn ‘A╙ā’ Allah al-Iskandarī, Kitāb al-Tanwīr fī Isāt al-Tadbīr.
This work has been described as the “basic training manual for
Sufis in North Africa.” It has been translated by Scott Kugle, The
Book of Illumination (Fons Vitae, 2005). Ibn ‘A╙ā’ Allah (d. 1309)
was the second successor to Abū ╔asan al-Shādhilī after Abū
‘Abbās al-Mursī.
Ibn ‘A╙ā’ Allah al-Iskandarī, Kitāb al-╔ikam
The “Book of Aphorisms,” is the most famous work of Ibn ‘A╙āAllah. It has been translated by Victor Danner, The Book of
Wisdoms (Paulist Press, 1979).
Ibn ╔ajar al-‘Asqalānī, Fat╕ al-Bārī.
Ibn ╔ajar (d. 1448) was a prominent Egypt ╔adīth scholar who
authored numerous works, the most widely known being Fat╕
al-Bārī, a commentary on the ╔adīth collection of Bukhārī.
Ibn ╔ajar al-Haytamī al-Makkī, al-Fatawat al-╔adīthiyya
Al-Haytamī (d. 1556) was a prominent scholar of Maliki
jurisprudence and Sufism.
Ibn al-╔ājj al-Abdari al-Fasi, Mu╕ammad, Madkhal al-Shara al-Sharīf
‘ala al-Madhāhib.
The Madkhal is a four volume work discussing various points of
Islamic law, mostly from the perspective of Mālikī
382 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
jurisprudence. Ibn al-╔ājj (d. 1336) taught at the Qarawyn
University in Fes, Morocco, but traveled throughout North
Africa and is buried in Egypt.
Ibn al-Mishrī, Muhammad, Kitāb al-Jāmi’ li al-‘Ulūm al-Fā’ida min
Bi╕ār al-Qu╙b al-Maktūm
The Kitāb al-Jāmi’ is one of the primary sources of the Tijānī
order, written during the founder’s lifetime in 1808. Its author
was Mu╕ammad b. al-Mishrī (d. 1809), a prominent Sufi and
scholar from Constantine, Algeria. Unlike the Jawāhir al-Ma’ānī,
the work has never been published.
Ibn Mubārak al-Lama╙ī, A╕mad, al-Dhahab al-Ibrīz min Kalām Sayyid
‘Abd al-‘Azīz al-Dabbāgh.
Ibn Mubārak was the disciple of Shaykh ‘Abd al-‘Azīz alDabbāgh (d. 1717, Fes), a renowned master of the Shādhilī order
who articulated ideas later associated with the ╘arīqa
Mu╕ammadiyya movements of Shaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī and
A╕mad b. Idrīs. For a recent translation, see: John O’Kane and
Bernd Radtke, Pure God from the Words of Sayyidi Abd al-Aziz alDabbagh: Al-Dhahab al-Ibriz min Kalam Sayyidi Abd al-Aziz alDabbagh (Brill, 2007).
Ibn al-Sā’i╕, Mu╕ammad al-‘Arabī, Bughyat al-Mustafīd.
Ibn al-Sā’i╕ (d. 1892, Rabat) was one of the most celebrated Tijānī
scholars of the nineteenth century. His work Bughyat al-Mustafīd,
a commentary on a poem called Munyat al-Murīd written by the
Mauritanian Shaykh Ahmad Tijānī Sīdī Bāba al-Alawi alShinqītī, is one of the primary works of the Tijaniyya. For more
on his life and work, see Abdelaziz Benabdallah, Le Soufisme
Afro-Maghrebin aux XIX et XXème Siècles (Rabat, 1995).
Khafājī, Shihāb al-Dīn al-, Nasīm al-Riyā╓ fī shar╕ Shifā’ al-Qā╓ī Īyād
This work by the Egyptian Hanafī scholar al-Khafājī (d. 1659) is a
commentary on the Shifā’ of Qā╓ī Īyād, the renowned book of
╔adīth and Prophetic biography from the 12th century.
Sources for the Kāshif 383
Kuntī, al-Mukhtār al-, al-Kawkab al-Waqqād fī fa╓l dhikr al-mashā’ikh wa
╕aqā’iq.
Al-Kuntī (d. 1811), described by Shaykh Ibrāhīm as “the shaykh
of shaykhs, the renowned scholar and Divine Gnostic,” was one
of the most important Qadiri shaykh and scholar in eighteenthcentury West Africa. He lived in Timbuktu, Mali, but revived the
Qadiriyya Sufi order throughout West Africa, becoming the
shaykh of Usman dan Fodio (d. 1817), the founder of the Sokoto
Caliphate based in northern Nigeria, as well as several
Mauritanian branches of the Qadiriyya. For more on Kuntī, see
Aziz Batran, The Qadiryya brotherhood in West Africa and the
Western Sahara: the life and times of Shaykh al-Mukhtar al-Kunti,
(1729-1811) (Rabat: Université Mohammed V, 2001).
Nawawī, Ya╕ya b. Sharaf al-, Kitāb al-Adhkār
Al-Nawawī (d. 1278) was an eminent ╔adīth scholar and Shāfi’ī
jurist in Damascus. He wrote numerous books, including ╔adīth
compilations such as Riyā╓ al-╖ālihīn, works on jurisprudence
such as Minhaj al-╘ālibīn, a book on Prophetic supplications and
remembrances called Kitāb al-Adhkār, and a work on inner
sincerity, Bustān al-‘Ārifīn.
Qushayrī, Abū al-Qāsim al-, Risāla ila al-╖ūfiyya.
Al-Qushayrī (d. 1072) was an important Persian scholar, famous
for ╔adīth transmission, Qur’ān exegesis and his Sufi teachings.
His Risāla (“Epistle to the Sufis”) has been most influential work.
For a translation of al-Qushayri’s Risāla, see Barbara Von
Schlegell (trans.), Principals of Sufism by al-Qushayri (Mizan Press,
1990), or Alexander Knysh (trans.), al-Qushayri’s Epistle on
Sufism: al-Risala al-Qushayriyya fi ‘ilm al-Tasawwuf (Garnet
Publishing, 2007).
Rāzī , Mu╕ammad b. ‘Umar Fakhr al-Dīn al-, Tafsīr al-Kabīr.
Al-Rāzī (d. 1210, Herat, Persia) was a great theologian,
philosopher and scientist. His multi-volume Tafsīr al-Kabīr, also
384 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
known as Mafātih al-Ghayb, is a comprehensive exegesis of the
Qur’ān.
╖āwī, A╕mad al-, ╔āshiya al-╖āwī ‘ala al-Jalālayn
Al-╖āwī (d. 1825) was a Mālikī scholar from India who wrote a
marginal commentary (╕āshiya) on the Tafsīr al-Jalālayn of Jalāl alDīn al-Suyū╙ī and Jalāl al-Dīn al-Ma╕allī. Al-╖āwī’s ╔āshiya
became popular among West African scholars, for whom the
Tafsīr al-Jalālayn has been one of the most important works of
exegesis for centuries. Al-╖āwī was an early critic of the Wahhabi
movement in Saudi Arabia, and accused it of being a
contemporary manifestation of the Kharajites.
Sha’rānī, ‘Abd al-Wahhāb al-, Ba╕r al-Mawrūd fī al-Mawāthiq wa al-
‘Uhūd.
Al-Sha’rānī (d. 1565) was a renowned Egyptian Shādhilī Sufi
shaykh and jurist of the ╔anafī school. He was the disciple of
‘Alī Khawwā╗, and emerged as one of the primary interpreters
of Ibn al-‘Arabī.
Sha’rānī, ‘Abd al-Wahhāb al-, Kitab al-Jawāhir wa al-Durar min-mā
istafadu Sayyid ‘Abd al-Wahhāb al-Sha’rānī min Shaykhihi Sayyidi ‘Alī alKhawwā╗.
The Kitab al-Jawāhir is a collection of teachings of al-Sha’rānī’s
Shaykh ‘Alī al-Khawwā╗.
Sha’rānī, ‘Abd al-Wahhāb al-, La╙ā’if al-Minan wa al-Akhlāq.
This work may be considered Sha’rānī’s spiritual autobiography.
It should not be confused with the La╙ā’if al-Minan of Ibn ‘A╙āAllah.
Sha’rānī, ‘Abd al-Wahhāb al-, al-╘abaqāt al-Kubra al-Musamma bi
Lawāqi╕ al-Anwār fī Tabaqāt al-Akhyār.
The ╘abaqāt is a collection of 430 biographies of righteous Sufis,
from the time of the Prophet’s companions to Sha’rānī’s s own
time.
Suyū╙ī, Jalāl al-Dīn al-, Tafsīr al-Jalālayn
Sources for the Kāshif 385
Al-Suyū╙ī (d. 1505) was famous Egyptian scholar known as the
renewer (mujaddid) of the faith in his century. He was also an
accomplished Sufi. He authored numerous works, many of
which quickly became widespread in West Africa. Most
significant in this regard has been the work of Qur’ānic exegesis,
Tafsīr al-Jalālayn, co-authored by Jalāl al-Dīn al-Ma╕allī.
Tha’alibī, Abd al-Ra╕mān al-, Jawāhir al-╔isān fī Tafsīr al-Qur’ān.
Tha’alibī’s (d. 1471) Jawāhir al-╔isān is a multi-volume exegesis
of the Qur’an.
‘Ubayda b. Mu╕ammad al-╖aghīr, Mīzāb al-Ra╕ma fī al-Tarbiya bi al-
╘arīqa al-Tijāniyya.
‘Ubayda was a nineteenth-century Mauritanian scholar of the
╔āfi╛iyya Tijānī legacy. His primary work is considered a
synthesis of the teachings of Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛ al-Shinqiti.
The book, written in 1851, details a process of spiritual training
(tarbiya) based on the principle of gratitude (shukr) passing
through the three stations of Islam, Iman and Ihsan.
‘Umar al-Fūtī Tāl, Kitāb al-Rimā╕ hizb al-Ra╕īm ‘ala nuhūr ╕izb al-rajīm.
Al-╔ājj ‘Umar (d. 1864) was originally from Futa Toro, Senegal,
but died in Mali fighting Jihad against the pagan Bambara
kingdoms and encroaching French influence. He briefly
established an Islamic state in what is now part of Mali, Senegal
and Guinea. The Kitāb al-Rimā╕ established al-╔ājj Umar as one
of the nineteenth century’s most renowned Tijānī scholars. For
more on al-╔ājj ‘Umar’s social and political activities, see David
Robinson, The Holy War of Umar Tal (Oxford University Press,
1985).
Wā╕idī, Abū al-╔asan al-, Kitāb Asbāb Nuzūl al-Qur’ān.
Al-Wā╕idī (d. 1076) was a famous interpreter of the Qur’ān from
Persia whose work Asbāb Nuzūl concerns the circumstances of
revelation of various verses of the Qur’ān.
Wānsharīsī, A╕mad b. Ya╕yā al-, Kitāb al-Mi’yār.
386 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Al-Wānsharīsī, also pronounced Wānsharīshī (d. 1508), was a
North African scholar of the Maliki school. His Kitāb al-Mi’yār is
a comprehensive collection of legal rulings and is considered an
important historical and legal source. This work was the central
source for David Powers, Law, Society and Culture in the Maghrib,
1300-1500 (Cambridge University Press, 2002).
Yadālī, Mu╕ammad al-, Shar╕ Khātimat al-Ta╗awwuf.
Al-Yadālī (d. 1753) was a famous Mauritanian jurist and Shādhilī
Sufi of the Daymani tribe. Besides the works on Sufism, Shar╕
Shahiyyat al-Samā’; and Shar╕ Khātimat al-Ta╗awwuf, he also
authored an exegesis of the Qur’ān called al-Dhahab.
Zabīdi , Murta╓a al-, Tāj al-‘Arūs min Jawāhir al-Qāmūs.
Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-Husayni, known as Murta╓a al-Zabīdi
(originally from India, d. 1790, Egypt) was one of his time’s most
famous ╔adīth scholars, Hanafi jurists, and lexicographer. Tāj al-
‘Arūs min Jawāhir al-Qāmūs is considered one of the largest
Arabic dictionaries, originally meant as a commentary on alQāmūs al-Mu╕īt. For more on Zabīdī, see Stefan Reichumuth, The
World of Murtada al-Zabidi (Cambridge, UK: Gibb Memorial
Trust, 2009).
Zarrūq, A╕mad, al-Burnusi al-Fasi, Ta’sīs al-Qawā’id wa al-Usūl wa
Ta╕╗īl al-Fawā’id li-dhawī al-Wu╗ūl fi al-Ta╗awwuf.
Zarrūq (d. 1493) was a North African scholarly Sufi who stressed
the proper balance between the Sacred Law (shari’a) and Sufism.
He spent many years in Cairo, where he studied under
Mu╕ammad al-Sakhawi, the student of Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani.
His primary spiritual guide in Cairo was A╕mad b. ‘Uqba al-
╔a╓ramī (d. 1489), a saint with both Shādhili and Qādirī Sufi
affiliation, who was originally from Yemen but who had settled
in Cairo. Zarrūq himself eventually settled in Libya. Like his
Shaykh ╔a╓ramī, Zarrūq’s exact Sufi affliliations are ambiguous,
seemingly a mixture of the Shadhiliyya, Qadiriyya and
Suhrawardiyya lines of transmission and practices. He authored
Sources for the Kāshif 387
numerous works on jurisprudence, Prophetic traditions,
supplications and Sufism. For more on Shaykh A╕mad Zarrūq,
see Scott Kugle, Rebel between Spirit and Law: Ahmad Zarruq,
Sainthood, and Authority in Islam (Indiana University Press, 2006);
and Ali Fahmi Khashim, Zarruq, the Sufi: a guide in the way and a
leader to the truth: a biographical and critical study of a mystic from
North Africa (Outline Series, 1976); and Zaineb Istrabadi, “The
Principles of Sufism (Qawā’id al-Ta╗awwuf)”: An annotated
translation with introduction (PhD Thesis, Indiana University,
1988).
389
Prominent Personalities
he following list of personalities is meant as a reference
for figures mentioned frequently by Shaykh Ibrāhīm in
the Kāshif.
Abū Madyan Shu’ayb
Abū Madyan (d. 1198) was born in Andalusia and died in
Tlemcen (Algeria). He was the teacher of Abd al-Salām b.
Mashīsh and thus an important figure in the development of the
Shādhiliyya order. He had begun teaching in Bougie (Algeria)
after returning from pilgrimage, influencing the likes of Ibn alArabī, Ibn Mashīsh and al-Shādhili. For more on his life and
thinking, see Vincent Cornell, The Way of Abu Madyan: Doctrinal
and Poetic Works of Abu Madyan Shu’ayb ibn al-Husayn al-Ansari
(Islamic Texts Society, 1996).
Abū Yazīd al-Bistāmī
Abū Yazīd (d. 874) was a prominent Sufi from Bistam, Persia. He
is credited with numerous ecstatic utterances.
‘Alī al-Khawwā╗
‘Alī al-Khawwā╗ (d. 1532) was a shaykh of the Shadhiliyya Sufi
order under whom al-Sha’rānī studied in Egypt.
Dhū al-Nūn al-Mi╗rī
Dhū al-Nūn (d. 859) was an early Sufi of Egypt. He was arrested
T
390 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
in 829 on charges of heresy and sent to prison in Baghdad. He
later returned to Cairo, where he is buried.
╔ājj Abd-Allah b. al-╔ājj al-‘Alawī
‘Abd-Allah wuld al-╔ājj (d. 1927) was a renowned scholar and
gnostic from Mauritania who traveled widely in the
Senegambian region, frequently visiting al-╔ājj Abd-Allah
Niasse. His silsila passes through Shaykh A╕mad b. Baddi
(known as “Abba,” d. 1905), to his father Shaykh Muhamdi
“Baddi” (d. 1855), the most prominent disciple of Shaykh
Mu╕ammad al-Hafiz b. al-Mukhtār (d. 1830). Al-╔ājj Abd-Allah
wuld al-╔ājj was the father of Mu╕ammad (known as “alMishri”), the father of the current Shaykh of Matamawlana
(Mauritania), al-╔ājj Abd-Allah Mishri.
Hakīm al-Tirmidhī
Al-Tirmidhī (d. 905 or 910) lived in Tirmidh, near Balkh in
modern-day Afghanistan. He is the first known Sufi or expound
on the concept of the Seal of Saints.
╔asan al-Ba╗rī
╔asan al-Ba╗rī (d. 737) became a student of ‘Alī b. Abī ╘ālib at a
young age. He moved from Medina to Iraq, where he formed a
school and taught both juristic and ascetic sciences. Most lines of
Sufi knowledge transmission pass through him to ‘Alī.
Imam al-╔aramayn
‘Abd al-Mālik Abū al-Ma‘ali al-Juwayni al-Shāfi'ī (d. 1085,
Hijaz), known as Imam al-╔aramayn, was one of the most
famous scholars of the Asharite school of theology. He was also
the teacher of Abū ╔āmid al-Ghazālī.
‘Izz al-Dīn al-Sulami
‘Izz al-Dīn (d. 1261) was a famous Shafi’i jurist and Shadhili Sufi
who spent most of his life in Syria and wrote Aqā’id Ahl al-Islām.
Junayd b. Mu╕ammad Abū Qāsim al-Khazzaz
Prominent Personalities 391
Junayd (d. 910, Baghdad) was “perhaps the most famous of the
early Sufis within Islam”, articulating ideas of sobriety in
mysticism and the annihilation (fana’) of the ego-self in Allah.
See Michael Sells, Early Islamic Mysticism: Sufi, Qur’ān, Mi’raj,
Poetic and Theological Writings (New Jersey: Paulist Press, 1996),
p. 21-22. Nearly all the Sufi orders, except the Tijāniyya (whose
silsilah goes directly from the Prophet to Shaykh A╕mad Tijānī),
provide their followers with a chain of spiritual transmission
(silsilah) passing through Junayd.
Khi╓r
Al-Khi╓r is the name given for the mystical guide of Moses
mentioned in the Qur’ān.
Makhzūmī, ‘Umar b. Mūs al-
“Sirāj al-Dīn” al-Makhzūmī (15th century) was head judge of his
time in Damascus. He was the student of Sirāj al-Dīn al-Bulqini,
a famous ╔adīth specialist. Both Bulqini and Makhzūmī came to
defend Ibn al-‘Arabī, Bulqini after originally criticizing him. Jalāl
al-Dīn Suyū╙ī listed al-Makhzūmī as one of his teachers.
Mālik b. Anas
Imam Mālik (d. 795) is the eponym for the Maliki school of
jurisprudence. He lived in Medina, the city of the Prophet, and
authored the Muwa╙╙a, an early collection of traditions mostly
with legal bearing. For more on Imam Mālik’s role in the
development of Islamic jurisprudence, see Yasin Dutton, The
Origins of Islamic Law: the Qur’ān, the Muwa╙╙a’ and the Madinan
‘Amal (Routledge, 2002).
Mawlūd Fāl
Shaykh Mawlūd Fāl was initiated into the Tijāniyya by
Mu╕ammad al- ╔āfi╛, and later traveled to Fes, Morocco, to
have his initiation renewed by the main zawiya there just after
the passing of Shaykh A╕mad Tijānī (1815). Mawlud Fal traveled
widely throughout West Africa and left many propagators of the
392 THE REMOVAL OF CONFUSION
Order in regions such as Futa Jallon, Northern Nigeria and
Sudan.
Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛ b. al-Mukhtār b. al-Habīb al-Shinqitī
Shaykh Mu╕ammad al-╔āfi╛ (1759-1830), mentioned in the text
as “our Shaykh and our means of access to Allah … by whose
hand the Tariqa has spread in the lands of the far west.” Shaykh
al-╔āfi╛ was of the Idaw ‘Alī people in Mauritania. He visited
Shaykh A╕mad Tijānī in Fes in from 1800-1804/5 and was the
first to bring the Tariqa Tijāniyya into Mauritania, from where it
later spread to the rest of West Africa.
Sahl al-Tustārī
Al-Tustārī (d. 896) was an influential figure in the early
development of Sufism. Al-Qushayri said of him, “He had no
peer in his time for correct transactions and fearing Allah, and he
was a man of miraculous occurrences.”
Shādhilī, Abū ╔asan alAl-Shādhilī (d. 1258) was a renowned Sufi scholar of Moroccan
origin who settled in Egypt and became the eponym for the
Shadhiliyya Sufi order found primarily in North Africa.
Tijānī, Abū al-‘Abbās A╕mad alShaykh A╕mad al-Tijānī (b. 1737, Algeria; d. 1815, Fes) was a
descendent of the Prophet Mu╕ammad ! who founded the
╘arīqa Mu╕ammadiyya Tijāniyya by order of the Prophet in a
waking vision. His followers consider him the “Hidden Pole”
(al-Qu╙b al-Maktūm) and the “Seal of the Saints” (Khatm al-
‘Awliyā’) based on his unprecedented proximity to the Prophet. 